Locke Studies
Founding Editor: Roland Hall
Vieldon Library
B125Q.L6
2nd Floor - Regula1
Loan
Locfce studies.
K
Fjeeeiued on. 16
17-09-'22
An Annual Journal of Locke Research
Yol. 16
7.0IÓ
LOCKE STUDIES
ED (TOR
Timothy Stanton
ADDRESS FOR SUBSCRIPTIONS AND CORRESPONDENCE
Dr. Timothy Stanton. Editor, Locke Studies, Department of Politics, University of York, York YO10 5DD, United Kingdom (emai 1: ed itor @ 1 ockestudies.org)
Published by Timothy Stanton
Typeset by the Editor Printed by Design & Print Solutions, University of York
ISSN 1476-0290
©Timothy Stanton, 2016
ISSN 1476-0290
Vol. 16
LOCKE STUDIES
2,016
Locke Studies is the one journal in the world that deals specifically with John Locke, and is the continuation of The Locke Newsletter, which appeared for thirty-one years, beginning in 1970. The volume numbers of the new series coincide with the date.
In the present volume there are articles relating to Locke’s account of persons and personal identity, his epistemology, his changing conception of physics and related classifications of the branches of knowledge, his natural philosophy, and the wider world of his London landlady, Rabsy Smithsby. There is also an article which discusses critical-text editing, developing a contrast between treatments of Locke and Sir Noel Malcolm’s recent edition of Hobbes’s Leviathan.
Contributions are invited for the next volume of Locke Studies. Work of any length will be considered. Articles and notes on any aspects of Locke’s work or life, or on related authors, may be submitted; also any queries about points in Locke, or unsolved problems. Contributions may be in English, French, German, or Italian. Initial submission should be by email. Once a contribution has been accepted for publication, authors will be asked to submit by email final text in accordance with the house style. They should follow the style of the present volume, which adheres closely to the Oxford Guide to Style (2002).
Please send reports of work in progress, or of the discovery of books that belonged to Locke’s library. Such items of information may be published from time to time. Authors of books on Locke should send in any important corrections that need making.
1
New books on Locke, if sent for review, will normally be found a reviewer. Authors are asked to instruct their publishers to send review copies to the journal.
The next issue of Locke Studies, vol. 17, will be the last under my editorship. Details of the new editorial team, and other changes to the journal, will be given in that issue.
Timothy Stanton Editor
Department of Politics, University of York,
Heslington, York Y010 5DD
9 01904 323567
Readers are welcome to contact the editor at, or to send submissions to:
editor@lockestudies.org
Please visit our website: www.lockestudies.org/
For other useful websites, see p. 40
For subscription rates, see inside the back cover.
2
THE ROLE OF APPROPRIATION IN LOCKE’S
ACCOUNT OF PERSONS AND PERSONAL IDENTITY
R u t h b g e k e r
Abstract
According to Locke, appropriation is a precondition for moral responsibility and
thus we can expect that it plays a distinctive role in his theory. Yet it is rare to
find an interpretation o f Locke’s account o f appropriation that does not associate
it with serious problems. To make room for a more satisfying understanding o f
Locke’s account o f appropriation we have to analyse why it was so widely
misunderstood. The aim o f this paper is fourfold: First, I will show that M aekie’s
and Winkler’s interpretations that have shaped the subsequent discussion contain
serious flaws. Second, I will argue that the so-called appropriation interpretation
— that is the view that appropriation is meant to provide alternative persistence
conditions for persons— lacks support. Third, 1 will re-examine Locke’s texts
and argue that we can come to a better understanding o f his notion o f
appropriation in the E ssay if w e interpret it in analogy to his account o f
appropriation in Two Treatises. Fourth, 1 w ill offer a more fine-grained
interpretation o f the role o f appropriation in relation to persistence conditions for
persons. I conclude by showing that the advantage o f this proposal is that it
reconciles interpretations that have comm only been thought to be inconsistent
K eyw ords: John Locke, appropriation, person, personal identity', consciousness
§1. Introduction
Locke’s theory of personal identity aims to answer questions of
moral accountability. For Locke it is important that a person
understands why he or she is held accountable for an action and
this involves that he or she understands the moral laws and
appropriates the action, or acknowledges it as his or her own.
This means that, according to Locke, appropriation is a
precondition for moral accountability and we can therefore expect
that appropriation plays a distinctive role in Locke’s theory (see
II.xxvii.16, 26).1
' AH references to John Locke, An Essay concerning Human Understanding, ed,
Peter H. Nidditch (Oxford, 197S), will appear by book number, chapter number, and
section number. For further discussion see Antonia LoLordo, Locke's Marat Man
(Oxford, 2012), ch. 2; J. L. Mackie, Problems front Locke (Oxford, 1976), 176 -77, 183;
Galen Strawson, Locke on Personal Identity: Consciousness and Concernment
3
Despite the significance of appropriation, the reception of it in tite literature is predominantly dismissive or negative, and it is rare to find an interpretation that does not associate appropriation with serious problems for Locke’s theory.2 In this paper I will
argue that a satisfying interpretation of Locke’s account of appropriation is missing and that the arguments that are meant to
present problems for Locke’s account of appropriation are
seriously flawed. By analyzing why Locke’s account of appropriation has been so widely misunderstood, I want to urge all those interpreters who tend to assume that Locke’s notion of appropriation is well explored and understood in the literature to re-examine Locke’s actual views.3
In the literature J. L. Mackie and Kenneth Winkler are often given credit for drawing attention to appropriation.4 However, Mackie associates appropriation with ‘perhaps the most damaging objection’5 * against Locke’s theory of personal identity, and Winkler ends his interpretation by acknowledging a tension between Locke’s account of appropriation and divine
(Princeton, NJ, 2011), ch. 3, especially 17-18; Kenneth P. Winkler, ‘Locke on Persona! Identity’, Journal of the History of Philosophy 29 (1991): 223; Gideon Yaffe, ‘Locke on Ideas of Identity and Diversity’, in The Cambridge Companion to Locke’s "Essay concerning Human Understanding', ed. Lex Newman (Cambridge, 2007), 220-23.
2 See Mackie, Problems from Locke, 183; Shelley Weinberg, ‘Locke on Personal Identity’, Philosophy Compass 6 (2011): 401-2 and ‘The Metaphysical Fact of Consciousness in Locke’s Theory of Personal Identity’, Journal of the History of Philosophy 50 (2012): 388-90; Winkler, ‘Locke on Personal Identity’; Yaffe, ‘Locke on Ideas of Identity and Diversity’, 221-23. LoLordo, Locke's Moral Man, ch. 2, does not follow the negative trend and endorses an appropriation interpretation. Other interpreters, who acknowledge appropriation in Locke’s theory, but who are less otten cited, include Michael Ayers, Locke: Epistemology and Ontology (2 vols., London, 1991), ii, 266-68; David P. Behan, ’Locke on Persons and Personal Identity’, Canadian Journal of Philosophy 9 (1979); 53-75; Eric Matthews, ‘Descartes and Locke on the Concept of a Person’, The Locke Newsletter 8 (1977): 26-28, 32-33; Strawson, Locke on Personal Identity, 17 18; Udo Thiel, Lockes Theorie der personalen Identität (Bonn, 1983), 116-17.
5 For example, LoLordo, Locke's Moral Man, maintains that ‘[tjhe appropriation interpretation is relatively familiar' (66),
4 See Mackie, Problems from Locke, 183; Winkler, ‘Locke on Personal Identity*.
' Mackie, Problems from Locke, 183,
4
rectification. In the recent literature there has been a revival, of this discussion, and Gideon Yaffe, Shelley Weinberg, and Antonia LoLordo have coined the term ‘appropriation interpretation.’6 While they all ascribe this interpretation to Winkler—and in some degree to Mackie—they tend to assume that appropriation is meant to provide alternative persistence conditions for persons that avoid problems that arise for memory interpretations, namely, the view that (direct or indirect) memory relations are necessary and sufficient for personal identity. ' This means the appropriation interpretation is the view that the necessary and sufficient conditions of what makes a person the same over time are to be understood in terms of appropriation. It is not obvious that Winkler’s original interpretation actually supports this view and thus I will use the term ‘appropriation interpretation’ to refer to the view that appropriation is meant to
6 See LoLordo, ‘Author Meets Critics on Antonia LoLordo’s “Locke’s Moral Man”: LoLordo’s Reply to Weinberg’, The Mod Squad: A Group Blog in Modern Philosophy. June 25, 2014, http://phiIosophymodsquad.wordpress.com/2QB/07/Q7/affle-lmra- lolordos-reply-to-weinberg/, Locke’s Moral Man, ch. 2, especially 65-06, 70-74, 82 (n 30), 98-99, 102; Shelley Weinberg, ‘Author Meets Critics on Antonia LoLordo’s “Locke’s Moral Man”: Shelley Weinberg’, The Mod Squad. June 25, 2014, littp://philosophymodsquad. wonipress.com/2013/07/Qti/anic-lmm-sheilev-wefflberg/ ‘Locke on Personal Identity’, 401-2, ‘The Metaphysical Fact’, 388-90; Yaffe, ‘Locke on Ideas of Identity and Diversity’, 221—23. 7
7 Yaffe argues that, according to Locke, personal identity consists in sameness of consciousness and so the real question is what Locke means hv sameness of consciousness. Yaffe discusses different meanings of sameness of consciousness. After he has outlined the problems for the view that consciousness is to be understood in terms of memory, he turns to the proposal that ‘“consciousness” is to he understood as “appropriation” or “subjective constitution"’ (‘Locke on Ideas of Identity and Diversity’, 221). This set-up makes clear that he assumes appropriation is meant to provide alternative persistence conditions for persons. Similarly Weinberg considers problems concerning die memory and appropriation interpretations to motivate her own interpretation of Locke’s persistence conditions for persons. See ‘Locke on Personal
Identity’, 401.2, ‘The Metaphysical Fact’, 388-90. LoLordo asks how consciousness
extends itself backwards. She rejects the view that consciousness extends itself by memory in favour of her view' that it extends itself by appropriation (see Locke Moral Man, 65, 70, 73), LoLordo argues ‘that consciousnesses extend themselves into the past and future by appropriation’ (Locke's Moral Man, 65). The phrase ‘consciousness extends itself by appropriation’ is vague, but because LoLordo contrasts her view with the memory interpretation she seems to treat appropriation as analogous to memory relations.
5
provide persistence conditions for persons, but, contrary to Yaffe, Weinberg, and LoLordo, I will examine whether, rather than assume that, Winkler endorses it. Moreover, it is not obvious that Locke would endorse it either. If this was his view, why did he not simply say that personal identity consists in appropriation, rather than claiming that it consists in sameness of consciousness? YatYe and Weinberg acknowledge the appropriation interpretation as an important interpretation, but argue that their own respective interpretations of the persistence conditions for persons are to be preferred and not subject to the problems associated with the appropriation interpretation. All those who follow' the trend and associate persistence conditions in terms of appropriation with serious problems tend to dismiss the possibility that appropriation can play a different role in Locke’s theory.8 In contrast to Yaffe and Weinberg, LoLordo endorses the appropriation interpretation.
The aim of this paper is fourfold: First, I will carefully examine Mackie’s and Winkler’s influential interpretations and show' that their arguments, which are meant to present problems for Locke’s account of appropriation, are seriously flawed. Second, I will argue that the so-called appropriation interpretation lacks support, because it cannot be ascribed to Mackie and Winkler as is assumed by Yaffe, Weinberg, and LoLordo and that the problems that Yaffe and Weinberg associate with it dissolve under closer scrutiny. Third, I will re-examine Locke’s texts and argue that we can come to a better understanding of his account of appropriation in the Essay if we interpret it in analogy to his account of appropriation in Two Treatises. Fourth, I will offer a more fine-grained interpretation of the role of appropriation in relation to persistence conditions for persons. I will propose that we can make progress by considering separately the relations and the relata that compose persistence conditions. Given this distinction, I argue that it is plausible that the relevant relata are
8 I admit that it is not the central task of Yaffe’s and Weinberg’s papers to offer a theory of appropriation, but the predominantly negative treatment of appropriation in the literature may explain why so few interpreters offer positive interpretations of it.
6
appropriated actions or thoughts,0 but that it is hard to make sense of the view that appropriation provides alternative relations that constitute the persistence conditions. These distinctions enable me to show that it is misleading to present the appropriation interpretation as an alternative to the memory interpretation, but rather, if we accept my proposed distinctions, appropriation can be reconciled with psychological interpretations as well as with interpretations such as Weinberg’s that argue for a more robust metaphysical fact of consciousness.10 The advantage of my proposal is that it does not dismiss appropriation as the critics of the appropriation interpretation do, but instead acknowledges that appropriation plays a distinctive role in Locke’s theory and takes seriously the questions of moral accountability that are at the heart of Locke’s theory.11
§2. Mackie on Appropriation
Let us turn to J. L. Mackie’s influential discussion in Problems from Locke. He emphasizes that Locke’s theory is a theory of action appropriation, but regards this to be an objection against Locke’s theory:
[Pjerhaps the most damaging objection is this. Since a man at t: commonly remembers only some of his experiences and actions at f, whereas what constituted a person at // was all the experiences and actions that were then co-conscious, Locke’s view fails to equate a person identified at t2 with any person identifiable at //. It is only a theory of how some items which belonged to a person identifiable at f are appropriated by a person who can
q _
It is worth noting that Locke’s term ‘thought’ is broader than it is in present-day usage and includes any conscious mental state. He adopts this broad notion from his predecessors Descartes and Cudworth. See Keith Allen, ‘Cudworth on Mind, Body, and Plastic Nature’, Philosophy Compass 8 (2013): 337-47, 343.
10 See Weinberg, ‘The Metaphysical Fact’.
11 For further discussion see Ruth Boeker, ‘"Die Moral Dimension in Locke's Account of Persons and Personal Identity’, History of Philosophy Quarterly 31 (2014): 229-47; Edmund Law, ‘A Defence of Mr. Locke’s Opinion Concerning Personal Identity’, in vol. 2 of The Works of John Locke, 12th ed. (London, 1824); Jessica Spector, ‘The Grounds of Moral Agency: Locke’s Account of Personal Identity’, Journo/ of Moral Philosophy 5 (2008): 256-81.
7
be identified as such only at is. it is therefore hardly a theory of personal
identity at all, but might be better described as a theory of action
appropriation. Locke seems to be forgetting that ‘person’ is not only ‘a
forensic term, appropriating actions and their merit’, but also the noun
corresponding to all the personal pronouns. (Problems from Locke, 183)
Mackie distinguishes a theory of personal identity from a
theory of action appropriation. In order to explain his argument, it
is worth specifying what he means by each of them respectively.
A theory of personal identity offers necessary and sufficient
conditions for a person P ; existing at /; to be the same person as a
person P2 existing at t2. The important point for Mackie’s
argument is that a theory of personal identity concerns individuals
existing at different times. In contrast to this, according to
Mackie, a theory of action appropriation offers an account of the
actions that a being12 ascribes, or appropriates, to him- or herself
at a particular time.13
On this basis, we can analyze Mackie’s argument for the claim
that a theory of action appropriation does not qualify as a theory
of personal identify. His argument has the following structure:
(1) A person at a time t is constituted by all the experiences and actions
of which he or she is eo-conscious at t.
(2) A person P2 at t2 appropriates only some experiences and actions of
a person P! existing at an earlier time
(3) In order for action appropriation to provide a suitable account of
personal identity', P2 has to appropriate all of P j's experiences and actions.
(4) Action appropriation does not provide a suitable account of the
identity of P-, with P2.
!* I use the term ‘being* to be neutral with respect to the question whether a person
exists prior to the act o f action appropriation or whether action appropriation is a
constitutive element of a p a w n ’s existence.
’ The textual evidence is not decisive whether Locke intends to offer a theory of
action appropriation or a theory o f personal identity over time. Support for the former
can be found in H.xxvii.16 and 26. However, other passages such as Il.xxvii.25 suggest
that, according to Ixjcke, a person exists over time.
8
The textual support makes it plausible to assume (1), and (2) is continued by experience. However, the question arises as to why Mackie endorses (3) and whether (3) should be accepted.
First, it is worth noting that (3) assumes that action appropriation is intended to provide persistence conditions for persons without providing any argument for this assumption. Second, Mackie equates the appropriation of a past action with remembering the past action as one’s own. There are three different ways to interpret what is meant by appropriation of past actions by remembrance.14 First, to appropriate a past action could be understood simply as remembering that action. This reading reduces appropriation of past actions to memory. However, if this was correct, then appropriation would not play any distinctive role in Locke’s theory and Mackie’s interpretation would be a version of a psychological account of personal identity.15
Second, appropriation of past actions by remembrance could be a special kind of remembering that differs intrinsically from other kinds of memory. However, it is unlikely that Mackie understands appropriation in this sense, because it undermines his argument. Mackie assumes that in order for action appropriation to provide persistence conditions for persons, P2 has to appropriate all the experiences and actions that Pt was co- conscious at ti and not merely those that one remembers in a special way.
On a third reading, appropriation of past actions could be distinguished from remembrance simpliciter, by proposing that appropriation does not only involve remembrance, but additionally a further component that cannot be reduced to
14 Note that I here focus on the appropriation of past actions, since they are the focus of Mackie’s argument. It is plausible that not only past actions are appropriated, but also present actions anti the appropriation of present actions will involve consciousness, rather than memory. The considerations given here can be extended to the appropriation of present actions by replacing ‘memory’ with ‘consciousness’.
1 ’ 1 use the term ‘psychological account of personal identity’ to refer to any theory that accounts for the persistence conditions for persons in terms of psychological relations such as consciousness or memory.
9
MMiB.MU? \
memory. For instance, it can be suggested that appropriation of past actions, does not merely require that I remember the action, but, additionally, I must have performed the action. This proposal provides a means to distinguish my actions from the actions of others that I can remember or be aware of. While 1 can remember the actions that my sister did, I do not appropriate them. In other words, I only appropriate actions that I performed myself. Again, it is unlikely that Mackie considered this meaning, because it renders Ms argument inconsistent. Given his assumption that in order for action appropriation to provide persistence conditions for persons, P- has to appropriate all the experiences and actions that Pj was co-conscious at th Mackie seems committed to the view that P} appropriates the actions that he or she perceived others doing at that time—yet this is exactly what this reading rejects. Consequently, each reading undermines the force of Mackie 5s argument.
À further deficiency of Mackie’s argument is that he fails to properly motivate the strong and questionable assumption that all past experiences and actions have to be appropriated in order for action appropriation to provide a suitable account of personal identity'. This is a pressing question, because there are alternative, and at least equally plausible, accounts of the persistence conditions for persons. For example, one might argue instead— inspired by certain Neo-Lockean views—that a sufficient number of past experiences and actions have to be appropriated.16 Mackie may respond that such a proposal is a revision of Locke’s view and does not properly accommodate Locke’s aim to answer questions of moral accountability with his theory. At this stage, it is worth drawing attention to the fact that I am conscious of more
Ui For instance, according to Derek Partît, ‘[fjor X and Y to bo the same person, there must be over every day enough direct psychological connections’ (Reasons and Persona {Oxford, 1984), 206), If Neo-Lockean theories succeed in offering an account of personal identity then it is unclear why Mackie claims that an account of personal identity in terms of action appropriation requires that all past experiences and actions are appropriated rather than a sufficient number of past experiences and actions. Note État this comparison with Neo-Lockean views is merely meant to challenge Mackie’s assumption and is not intended to be an endorsement of Neo-Lockean interpretations of Locke.
10
than morally significant experiences and actions, since many thoughts and actions are morally neutral in the sense that one neither deserves reward nor punishment for having done or doing them. This observation invites a distinction between morally significant experiences and actions and those that are not morally significant. Since Locke—as Mackie acknowledges—is
particularly interested in questions of moral accountability throughout his discussion of personal identity, it is plausible that he may have given morally significant experiences and actions different weight than other experiences and actions.1' On this basis, we can now contrast Mackie’s premise (3) with two alternative accounts of the persistence conditions for persons and distinguish the three following positions:
(PI,) A person Py existing at tj is the same person as a person P2 existing at t2 if and only if P2 is able to be conscious of all of the morally significant experiences and actions that Pi was co-conscious.
(PI2) A person Pt existing at tt is the same person as a person P2 existing at t2 if and only if P2 is able to be conscious of all of the morally significant experiences and actions which Pi was co-conscious and of a sufficient number of other experiences and actions that P. was co-conscious.
(PL) A person P, existing at tj is the same person as a person P? existing at t2 if and only if P2 is able to be conscious of all of the experiences and actions that Pi was co-conscious.
In support of (PI,) it can be argued that the restriction to morally significant thoughts and actions is in accordance with Locke’s aim to address questions of accountability, Locke introduces the notion of a person in addition to the notions of a human organism, or ‘man’ to use Locke’s term, and a substance in order to trace the continued existence of a subject of 17
17 Since for Locke appropriation is a necessary condition for moral accountability, morally significant actions will be actions that a self is able to appropriate. However, it is an open question whether there are appropriated thoughts or actions that are not morally significant, I want to he neutral on this issue and for this reason 1 do not formulate the following positions in terms of appropriation.
11
lUi ! V
accountability over time.18 According to Locke, if we want to decide whether an individual now is the same person, or subject of accountability, as an individual that committed a crime, bodily continuity will neither be sufficient nor necessary. It is not sufficient, because an individual may have irretrievably forgotten a past crime and yet the body continues to exist (see II.xxvii.20). Locke's prince-cobbler example is meant to show that bodily continuity is not necessary (see Il.xxvii.15). Similarly, Locke argues that sameness of substance is neither necessary nor sufficient for the continued existence of a person, or subject of accountability’. Thus, Locke believes that it is important to introduce the term ‘person’ to properly address questions of accountability. Given that Locke’s account of personal identity is intended to track accountability', it seems pointless to include morally neutral experiences and actions into the persistence conditions for persons.
However, one can defend (PI2) against (PIi) by arguing that including consciousness of some morally neutral experiences and actions will help a person to trace the morally significant actions within his or her past, because (PL) may be too thin for a person to realize how' an action was connected with other past experiences. Locke argues in II.xxvii.22 that in the Great Day one’s conscience will accuse or excuse oneself. This provides support for the view that an individual shall understand the justice of reward and punishment from a first personal perspective.
Let us turn to (PI3)—the view that underlies Mackie’s argument. Due to forgetfulness (PI3) will be less often satisfied than (PL) and (PI2). This calls into question the plausibility of (PL), because it is problematic to accept that one ceases to be the same person as a past self by forgetting morally insignificant experiences or actions of the past self. For example, it follows that one ceases to be the same person merely by forgetting morally insignificant experiences such as the colour of the shirt that one’s mother was wearing a week ago. This result is
18 For further discussion why it is plausible to regard Lockean persons as subjects of accountability see Boeker, ‘The Moral Dimension of Locke’s Account of Persons and Persona] identity’.
12
■
particularly unmotivated if we take seriously Locke’s aim to address questions of accountability.
Consequently, (PI () and (PI2) are more plausible candidates than (PI3). On this basis we can conclude that Mackie’s premise (3), which assumes (PI3) and does not acknowledge the possibility of (PI 1) or (PI2), is not well supported. Since Mackie emphasizes that moral accountability is at the heart of Locke’s theory, Mackie could welcome (Pit) and (PI2) as more sympathetic interpretations of Locke. There is no need to take a stance on whether (Pit) or (PI2) provides the better account of personal identity, as long as a person will be accountable for the same actions.19
To sum up, Mackie argues that Locke’s theory is a theory of action appropriation, but he takes this to be an objection, because appropriation is not suitable to provide proper persistence conditions for persons. However, as I argued, Mackie’s argument can be criticized on several grounds: First, it assumes without further argument that appropriation is meant to provide persistence conditions for persons. Second, Mackie either equates appropriation with consciousness or memory' in general and so does not leave room for appropriation to play a distinctive role in Locke’s theory, or appropriation will have to be understood in a sense that is inconsistent with Mackie’s argument. Furthermore, I argued that his assumptions concerning the persistence conditions for persons are very demanding and lack motivation in light of alternative accounts that are more sympathetic to Locke’s view.
We can conclude that Mackie’s argument, due to its flaws, is not a reliable source to support an interpretation of Locke’s account of appropriation, and, in particular, it does not provide adequate support for the appropriation interpretation. Next, let us turn to Winkler’s interpretation to see whether his view is more promising.
IJ One may argue that all experiences ami actions are morally significant and that, consequently, (PI.) collapses into (PI3). I do not have an argument to rule out this possibility in principle. However, my main point still holds, namely, that Mackie owes us a further justification for why he endorses the very' demanding condition (Pip. Note lurther that the options discussed here are not meant to be exhaustive.
r;
13
MVKraMUi \ v
§3. Winkler on Subjective Constitution and The Problem
of Reconciling Appropriation and the Possibility of Divine
Adjustments
Winkler’s main contribution, as we will see in a moment, consists in his claim that appropriation plays an important role with respect to a person’s or seifs subjective constitution. We will have to examine whether, according to him, appropriation is merely involved in the constitution of a person at a time, or whether it additionally provides alternative persistence conditions for persons—as is assumed by the so-called appropriation interpretation in the more recent literature. He ends the paper by acknowledging that appropriation, or the subjective constitution of a person, is hard to reconcile with the possibility of objective divine adjustments. Yaffe and Weinberg argue that the appropriation interpretation is to be rejected due to this problem and, hence, it is worth examining it closely. Let us turn to the details of Winkler’s view.
According to Winkler, a seifs or person’s own constitution provides the basis of Locke’s account of persons and personal identity:
I am proposing that Locke is interested in a sense of the word self according to which what the self includes depends on what it appropriates.
1 think we can all imagine finding a place for such a notion. “Perhaps so- and-so did commit the crime, but if he is not aware of having done it, then there is a sense in which the action is not his own.” (‘Locke on Personal Identity’, 205)
As §26 makes clear, the self has a certain authority over its constitution. It is important to realize that this authority is not consciously exerted, I do not wilfully disown one act and appropriate another, instead I accept what my consciousness reveals to me, (‘Locke on Personal Identity’, 206)
Winkler emphasizes the authoritative role that a self has over his or her own constitution. He also calls this the ‘subjective
14
constitution’ of a self. By this he means that any criticism must be based on the seifs own appropriations.21
As before, we can ask whether appropriation plays a distinctive role or whether it reduces to consciousness. According to Winkler, consciousness is clearly a necessary condition for appropriation, but does he also regard it to be sufficient? He does not engage with this question, yet it can be argued that T am aware of more actions than those that I appropriate. For example, I can be aware of my sister’s actions by observing her, but I would not appropriate her actions as my own actions. Since Winkler argues that one must be aware of having committed a crime in order to appropriate it, I believe that he would be happy to acknowledge a difference between mere conscious awareness and action appropriation or, at least, he would be happy to regard appropriation as a special kind of conscious awareness?' Hence consciousness is necessary for appropriation but appropriation cannot be equated with consciousness in general. This creates scope for appropriation to play a distinctive role in Locke’s theory.
Winkler’s claims so far establish that appropriation plays an important role with respect to a person’s constitution at a time, but we have not yet encountered an argument for the further claim that appropriation provides alternative persistence conditions for persons. He does not explicitly distinguish these two questions and remains vague on the latter. Nevertheless, he maintains that ‘the constitution of the self takes place over time’ (207) and that the self over time cannot be constituted by consciousness alone due to the problem of transitivity that Berkeley and Reid raised for Locke’s theory.2’ In response to this
20 Winkler, ‘Locke on Personal Identity', 201,204,208, 209, 220,222, 223, 225.
21 See Winkler, ‘Locke on Personal Identity’, 208.
"2 See Winkler, ‘Locke on Personal Identity', 205.
J See Winkler, ‘Locke on Personal Identity’, 206-8. See George Berkeley, Alciphron, or The Minute Philosopher, in The Works of George Berkeley Bishop of Cloyne, ed. A. A, Luce and T. E, Jessop (9 vote,, London. 1950), iii, 299; Thomas Reid, Essays on the Intellectual Powers of Man, ed. Derek R. Brookes (Edinburgh, 2002), Hl.vi, 276.
15
problem Winkler proposes that Locke could easily accept that personal identity over time is constituted by the ancestral of the co-consciousness or memory relation. For present purposes, 1 will not further engage with the question whether replacing the coconsciousness or memory relation with the ancestral of that relation provides a satisfying solution to the problem of transitivity, because it leads astray from the actual topic of this paper.24 The more important question here is whether Winkler’s view that personal identity7 is constituted by the ancestral of the co-consciousness or memory7 relation leaves room for appropriation to provide alternative persistence conditions for persons. He does not give any indication that he intends his interpretation of Locke’s account of personal identity to provide an alternative account, but rather he presents it as a version of a psychological account of personal identity. Otherwise he would and should have made explicit that he intended to offer an alternative account. In the absence of such clarification, we have reason to conclude that, according to Winkler, appropriation is relevant for the constitution of a self at a time, but is not intended to replace psychological accounts of personal identity.
Having argued that appropriation or subjective constitution plays an important role in Locke’s account of persons, Winkler ends his paper by raising a tension between the subjective constitution of a person and objective third-personal criticism and adjustments,25 It is important for Locke to leave room for the possibility of objective adjustments or criticisms, because he takes seriously the possibility of divine rectification at the Last Judgement (see ILxxvii.13, 15, 21-22, 26; IV.iii.6; IV.xvviii),“'6
24 For flutter discussion see Nicholas Jolley, Locke: His Philosophical Thought (Oxford, 1999), 120-21; E. J. Lowe, Locke on Human Understanding (Abingdon, 1995), 112—14; Mackie, Problems from Locke, 178-83; Harold W. Noonan, Personal Identity, 2nd «in. (Abingdon, 2003), 55-56; Strawson, Locke on PersonaI Identity, 53- 57, ehs, 10-11; Matthew Stuart, Locke's Metaphysics (Oxford, 2013), eh. 8, especially 353-59, 378-85.
2i See Winkler, ‘Locke on Personal identity’, 209-11,220-23.
* See also John Locke, Writings on Religion, cd. Victor Nuevo (Oxford, 2002), especially "Resurrect)u et quae sequuntur’, 232 37.
16
The doctrine of divine rectification says that God at the Great Day will reward and punish persons for their doings in this life, and, if necessary, correct human injustice.27 In order for God to justly reward or punish people at the Great Day an objective standard will be needed that guarantees, or enables God to make adequate adjustments such that, resurrected persons acknowledge all their past thoughts and actions and only their past thoughts and actions.28 However, is there room for such objective divine adjustments if the self is subjectively constituted?
Winkler argues that it is difficult to reconcile appropriation with the possibility of divine adjustment. He connects the difficulty to a dilemma that Flew raised many years ago for Locke’s theory.29 Flew distinguishes phenomenal or seeming memory from genuine memory and argues that Locke’s theory- collapses on either understanding of memory:30 On the one hand,
27 See Weinberg, ‘Author Meets Critics on Antonia LoLordo’s “Locke’s Moral Man”: Shelley Weinberg’; ‘The Metaphysical Fact’, 389.
28 See Winkler, ‘Locke on Personal Identity’, 220. Winkler’s and Weinberg’s views concerning tire possibility of divine rectification are similar. LoLordo agrees that the theory must provide scope for divine rectification, but denies the need for divine adjustments, because, according to her, there will be no misappropriations. See LoLordo, ‘Author Meets Critics on Antonia LoLordo’s “Locke’s Moral Man“: LoLordo’s Reply to Weinberg’; Locke’s Moral Man, 70-74. LoLordo’s arguments against misappropriations depend on a non-transitive interpretation of Locke’s account of personal identity. Although such interpretations have been defended by Mackie, Problems from Locke, 178-83, Strawson, Locke on Personal Identity’, 53-57, chs. ID- 11, and Stuart, Locke's Metaphysics, ch. 8, especially 353-59, 378-85, the debate is not settled. I prefer to be neutral on whether Locke’s account of personal identity is transitive or not and hence 1 do not follow LoLordo in assuming that misappropriation is impossible; rather I believe that a theory that can incorporate misappropriations has broader scope.
2‘’ Sec Anthony Flew, ‘Locke and die Problem of Personal Identity’, Philosophy’ 26 (1951): 58.
1 will follow Flew in presenting the dilemma in terms of memory. However, it is worth noting that Locke’s notion of consciousness is not to be reduced to memory, because it includes consciousness of the present and extends into the future (see Margaret Atherton, ‘Locke’s Theory of Personal Identity’, Midwest Studies in Philosophy 8 (1983): 273 93; Matthews, 'Descartes and Locke on tire Concept of a Person*, 28-30; Marya Sehechtman, The Constitution of Selves (Ithaca, NY, 1996), 105-12, especially 107; Strawson, Locke on Personal Identity, eh. 9; Udo Thiel, Lockes Theorie der personalen Identität, 129 31, and his The Early Modern Subject (Oxford,
17
if memory is understood in terms of phenomenal memory, then whatever 1 seem to remember was done by me. As a consequence Locke's theory? would not leave room for error. However, Locke mentions in II.xxvii,13 the possibility of ‘■fatal Error’ and this conflicts with the phenomenal memory reading. On the other hand, if memory is understood in terms of genuine memory, Flew argues that Locke has to give up his view that personal identity consists in sameness of consciousness, admitting, according to Flew, that ‘same person’ has to be defined at least partially in terms of ‘same thinking substance’ (‘Locke and the Problem of Personal Identity?’, 58).
Winkler engages with the problem raised by Flew, and acknowledges:
The problem is that if we respond by saying that any thought or action appropriated by my present self is in fact mine, we lose (as Flew in effect insists) the possibility of divine criticism (‘Locke on Personal Identity’, 221)
At the very' least, Flew’s objection shows that the dominant themes in Chapter 27—the subjective constitution of the self, and the possibility of objective criticism and adjustment—cannot easily be combined (‘Locke on Personal Identity’, 222)
It is right that if memory can be reduced to phenomenal memory, then the view will not leave room for divine criticism. However, the problem with Winkler’s analysis of the tension is that he follows Flew in understanding Locke’s account of memory in terms of phenomenal memory. Yet there is no good textual support for understanding Locke’s account of memory in this way. Memory, according to Locke, requires previous awareness of the thought or action remembered (see I.iv.20, II.x.2, 7):J1
2011), 109, 122-26). However, consciousness of past thoughts and actions involves rneraorv' (see I.iv.20, IF.x).
See Don Garrett, ‘Locke on Personal Identity, Consciousness, and “Fatal Errors”5, Philosophical Topics 31 (2003); 100-2.
18
this laying up of our Ideas in the Repository of the Memory, signifies no more but this, that the Mind has a Power, in many cases, to revive Perceptions, which it has once had, with this additional Perception annexed to them, that it has had them before. (II.x.2)
The previous awareness condition of memory makes it possible to distinguish imaginary memories from genuine memories, at least from a divine perspective, because in the case of imaginary memories there has never been a previous perception of the thing or event that one now seems to remember.
Although Winkler presents the problem as a tension between appropriation and the possibility of divine rectification, closer inspection shows that it concerns a tension between phenomenal memory and the possibility of divine rectification. Since Locke does not understand memory in terms of phenomenal memory, the problem can be avoided.
Given the previous analysis, namely, that appropriation is relevant for the constitution of a person at a time but is not intended to provide alternative persistence conditions for persons, this result is not surprising. The objective standard that is needed for divine adjustments has to be built into the relation that constitutes personal identity over time. Since appropriation on Winkler’s view does not provide alternative persistence conditions, there is no specific problem concerning appropriation. If there is a tension, then it has broader scope and concerns psychological accounts of personal identity more generally.
§4. Revisiting the So-Called Appropriation Interpretation
In the more recent literature the so-called appropriation interpretation is often ascribed to Winkler. However, in light of the previous critical discussion of Mackie’s and Winkler’s interpretations, we have to revisit whether the appropriation interpretation is subject to the same problems and whether there is support for such a view.
To begin, let me put aside Yaffe’s and Weinberg’s criticism of the appropriation interpretation. Both reject it due to the apparent problem that appropriation does not leave room for objective
19
criticism.''' However, as the discussion above has shown, this problem is merely apparent and arises because Winkler follows Flew in interpreting memory in terms of phenomenal memory. Since this reading is not supported by Locke’s text, Yaffe’s and Weinberg’s criticisms are undermined too.
It remains to consider whether appropriation can provide alternative persistence conditions, as Yaffe, Weinberg, and LoLordo assume when they introduce the appropriation as an alternative to the memory interpretation. They do not offer a detailed argument, but rather they ascribe the view to Winkler, and sometimes more remotely to Mackie. However, as we have seen, neither Mackie nor Winkler offer arguments in support of the claim that appropriation is meant to provide alternative persistence conditions. Consequently, the view is unsupported in the absence of another argument.
I will return to these issues in the final section. However, first it is important to re-examine Locke’s texts closely. This is the task to which I turn now.
§5. The Role of Appropriation in Locke’s Texts
In light of the problems that arise for Mackie’s and Winkler’s discussion of appropriation, and the subsequent lack of support for the so-called ‘appropriation interpretation’, it is fair to say that a satisfying understanding of the role that appropriation plays in Locke’s account of persons and personal identity is missing. This makes it worth returning to Locke’s texts and to re-examine his own understanding of appropriation. The problems identified in the previous considerations make it interesting to draw particular attention to the following questions: First, is appropriation relevant for the constitution of a person at a time? Second, is appropriation meant to provide a new self-standing account of the persistence conditions for persons? While Winkler puts emphasis on the former and is vague with regard to the latter, the problem with Mackie’s view is that he believes the latter.
n See Weinberg, ‘Author Meets Critics on Antonia LoLordo’s “Locke’s Moral Man": Shelley Weinberg’, ‘The Metaphysical Fact’, 389 90; ‘Locke on Personal Identity', 401-2; Yaffe, ‘Locke on Ideas of Identity and Diversity’, 223,
20
Since Locke mentions appropriation in his chapter ‘Of Identity and Diversity’ explicitly only in Il.xxvii, 16 and 26, it will be helpful to consider whether his other writings help to provide a fuller understanding of his account of appropriation and its role in his discussion of persons and personal identity. Besides the Essay, the second of Locke’s Two Treatises of Government is an important source, because appropriation is relevant in the chapter ‘Of Property’ (Two Treatises, II.v),33 I will therefore briefly turn to Locke’s Two Treatises to consider whether Locke’s understanding of appropriation there helps to illuminate his discussion in Essay Il.xxvii.
There are interesting terminological parallels between Locke’s discussion of persons and personal identity in Essay Il.xxvii and his discussion of property in Two Treatises II.v, though we have, of course, to be cautious not to stretch the parallels too far, because the Essay is a philosophical work in which Locke aims for terminological precision, while in Two Treatises he follows ordinary language use and does not distinguish the terms ‘person’ and ‘man’.34 While in the Essay’ Locke speaks of the appropriation of actions by consciousness, in Two Treatises he discusses appropriation of external objects by labour. He argues in Two Treatises that by mixing one’s labour with common goods such as fruits, animals or land they become one’s property or one
33
References to Locke, Two Treatises are to John Locke. Two Treatises of Government, ed. Peter Laslett (Cambridge, 1988). See Ayers, Locke, ii, 266-68; Thomas Mautner, ‘Locke’s Own’, The Locke Newsletter 22 (1991): 73-SO; Thiel. Lockes Theorie der personalen Identität, 116-17, especially note 28; John W. Yolton, Locke: An Introduction (Oxford, 1985); Naomi Zack, ‘Locke's Identity Meaning of Ownership’, The Locke Newsletter 23 (1992); 105 13, for discussion of the role of appropriation in Il.xxvii in relation to Locke’s Second Treatise and natural law theory. Further literature on appropriation and ownership which focuses on the Second Treatise includes Stephen Buckle, Natural Law and the Theory of Property: Grotius to Hume (Oxford, 1991), 149 90; J. P. Day, ‘Self-Ownership’, The Locke Newsletter 20 (1989k 77-85; Karl Olivecrona, ‘Appropriation in the State of Nature: Locke on the Origin of Property’, Journal of the History of Ideas 35 (1974): 211-30, 'Locke’s Theory of Appropriation’, The Philosophical Quarterly 24 (1974); 220-34; James Tolly, A Discourse on Property; Locke and his Adversaries (Cambridge, 1980).
M For further discussion see Ayers, Locke, ii, 266 68; Timothy Stanton. “Christian Foundations; or Some Loose Stones? Toleration and the Philosophy of Locke's Politics’; Thiel, Lockes Theorie der Personalen Identität, 116-17, especially note 28.
21
makes them one’s own (see Two Treatises, Il.v.26-39). Hence, in this context ‘to appropriate something’ means ‘to make it one’s own’. The following passages further illustrate this point:
God. who has given the World to Men in common, hath also given them reason to make use of it to the best advantage of Life, and convenience... yet being given for the use of Men, there must of necessity be a means to appropriate them [i.e. the fruits and beasts] some way or other before they can be of any use, or at all beneficial to any particular Man. The Fmit, or Venison, which nourishes the wild Indian, who knows no Inclosure, and is still a Tenant in common, must be his, i.e. a part of him, that another can no longer have any right to it, before it can do him any good for the support of his Life.
Though die Earth, and all inferior Creatures be common to all Men, yet every Man has a Property in his own Person. The Labour of his Body, and the Work of his Hands, we may say, are properly his. Whatsoever then he removes out of the State that Nature hath provided, and left in it, he hath mixed his Labour with, and jovned to it something that is his own, and thereby' makes it his Property'. It being by him removed from the common state Nature placed it in, it hath by his labour something annexed to it, that excludes the common right of other Men. For this Labour being the unquestionable property of the Labourer, no Man but he can have a right to what that is once joyned to, at least where there is enough, and as good left in common for others. (Two Treatises, II.v.26 -27)
How can we understand Locke’s claim that common goods become part of oneself by appropriation? Locke stands in the natural law' tradition, and in natural law theory it was common to describe what belongs to a person with the term suum—one’s own.35 Grotius, for example, argues that “[b]y nature, a man’s life is his own, not indeed to destroy, but to safeguard; also his own are his body, limbs, reputation, honour, and the acts of his will.” (On the Law of War and Peace, 2.17.2.1),36 The suum can be
3 See Buckle, Natural Law and the Theory of Property, Olivecrona, ‘Locke’s Theory of Appropriation’; Zack, ‘Locke’s Identity Meaning of Ownership’.
v’ References to On the Law of War and Peace are to Hugo Grotius, On the Law of War and Peace, ed. Stephen C, Neff (Cambridge, 2012). Similarly as Grotius, Samuel Pufendorf lists ‘our Life, our Bodies, our Members, our Chastity, our Reputation, and our Liberty' as ‘Things which we receive from the immediate Hand of Nature* (Of the Law of Nature and Nations, ed. Jean Barbcyrac (I .ortdon, 1729), 3.1.1).
22
regarded as the sphere of personality and it is often thought to extend to external objects. By making something one’s own one gains a special right to use the things one appropriated and one is entitled to expect reparation if others damage the things belonging to the suum?1 The term suum was translated by ‘propriety’ and ‘property’ into seventeenth-century English.38 In Two Treatises II.v.27, Locke argues that property includes not only external objects, but also that everyone ‘has a Property in his own Person’ and that labour is the property of the labourer. Thus Locke’s notion of property has its origin in the notion of the suum?9 By investing labour we appropriate something, or make it our own.
It is now time to turn to the relevant passages in Locke’s Essay. Within his discussion of persons and personal identity Locke mentions appropriation only in II.xxvii.16 and 26 explicitly:
For as to this point of being the same self, it matters not whether this present self be made up of the same or other Substances, I being as much concern’d, and as justly accountable for any Action was done a thousand Years since, appropriated to me now by this self-consciousness, as I am, for what I did the last moment. (Il.xxvii. 16)
Person..As a Forensick Term appropriating Actions and their Merit; and so belongs to intelligent Agents capable of a Law, and Happiness and Misery. This personality extends it se//'beyond present Existence to what is past, only by consciousness, whereby it becomes concerned and accountable, owns and imputes to it self past Actions, just upon the same ground, and for the same reason, that it does the present. All which is founded in a concern for Happiness the unavoidable concomitant of consciousness, that which is conscious of Pleasure and Pain, desiring, that
17 See Pufendorf, Of the Law of Nature ami Nations, 4.4.
The terms ‘propriety’ and ‘property’ were often used interchangeably in the seventeenth century. Locke tended to use ‘propriety’ and changed it into ‘property’ in later versions of his work. See Buckle, Natural Law and the Theory of Property, 172- 73.
31 For further discussion see Buckle, Natural Law and the Theory of Property, 169- 73; Olivecrona, ‘Locke’s Theory of Appropriation’.
23
that self, that is conscious, should be happy. And therefore whatever past Actions it cannot reconcile or appropriate to that present self by consciousness, it can be no more concerned in, than if they had never been done (Il.xsvii.26).
In these passages Locke speaks explicitly of the appropriation of past actions by consciousness, but his claim in Il.xxvii.26 that a person ‘owns and imputes to it w//'past Actions, just upon the same ground, and for the same reason, that it does the present’ suggests that appropriation extends also to present actions.
By appropriating something one owns it.40 However, does ‘to appropriate something’ mean ‘to make something one’s own’ in the Essay as well as in Two Treatises?41 We find support for this reading in II.xxvii.24 where Locke states that I make thoughts and actions my own by my consciousness. Furthermore, the proposal that Locke continues to use appropriation in the sense of ‘making one's own’ fits squarely with Locke’s aim to offer an account of persons and personal identity that addresses questions of moral accountability. In order to hold a person accountable for an action, there has to be a way to decide whether the action is his or her own, because a person is not held accountable for the actions of others, at least if he or she is ignorant of them. This means just accountability presupposes a way of distinguishing the actions of one person from the actions of all other persons. If appropriation is understood as a means of making something
^ In addition to II.xxvii.26, this reading is suggested by ILxxvii. 17: ‘That with which the consciousness of this present thinking thing can join it seif, makes the same Person, and is one self with it, and with nothing else; and so attributes to it self, and owns ail die Actions of that thing, as its own, as far as that consciousness reaches, and no farther; as every one who reflects will perceive.’ See also Il.xxvli. 14, 18,24, 26,
41 This reading has been questioned by Mautner, ‘Locke’s Own’, who argues that there are two senses of own: One is the familiar possessive sense, and the other is an older usage, according to which ‘to own’ means ‘to state, declare, admit, confess, acknowledge it’ (74). According to Mautner, Locke’s notion of own in the Essay is to be understood in the declarative sense. For a critical response see Zack, ‘Locke’s Identity' Meaning of Ownership’. I believe that it is difficult to understand Locke’s use of ‘own’ in ILxxvii in a purely declarative sense. For example, the expression ‘as its own’, which is part of the statement ‘and owns all the Actions of that thing, as its own, as far as that consciousness reaches’ (ILxxvii. 17), can hardly be interpreted in the purely declarative sense, but rather introduces a reflexive, if not possessive, element.
24
one’s own, then appropriation distinguishes my actions from the actions of others and plays an interesting role in Locke’s theory.
As already mentioned it is plausible to suppose that Locke’s account of appropriation in the Essay involves action appropriation both at a time when an action is initially performed and at a later time when we acknowledge a previously performed action as our own. I will call the former ‘appropriation of present actions’ and the latter ‘appropriation of past actions’. It is worth asking separately how the appropriation of present and past actions is to be understood.
To begin with the appropriation of present actions, at the present moment I can be conscious of many actions. However, this awareness by itself does not make an action my own action, because I can also observe the actions of others. The difference between my actions and the actions of others is that I perform my actions and that I am aware of performing them. Since I can also perceive other people performing actions, this difference cannot be exclusively explained with reference to the content of the perception, namely my representation of the performance of the action, but rather when I perceive an action as my own I have an intimate experience of doing the action, namely, an experience of the physical and/or cognitive labour that I invest. It is worth noting that purely physical movements of one’s body such as those of a sleepwalker will not be sufficient for action appropriation, because in such cases one lacks awareness of performing the action. Since all present actions that one appropriates involve awareness of one’s performance of the action, action appropriation will be accompanied by a distinctive inner experience of the physical and/or cognitive labour.
To further support why 1 believe that the appropriation of present actions is accompanied by a distinctive inner experience of the labour that one invests, I want to draw attention to Locke’s remarks about sensitive knowledge:
But yet here, I think, we are provided with an Evidence, that puts us past doubting: For 1 ask any one, Whether he be not invincibly conscious to himself of a different Perception, when he looks on the Sun by day, and thinks of it by night; when he actually tastes Wormwood, or smells a Rose,
25
or only thinks on that Savour, or Odour? We as plainly find the difference there is between an Idea revived in our Minds by our own Memory, and actually coming into our Minds by our Senses, as we do between any two distinct Ideas (lV.ii.14).
For he that sees a Candle burning, and hath experimented the force of its Flame, by putting his Finger in it, will little doubt, that this is something existing without him, which does him harm, and puts him to great pain: which is assurance enough, when no Man requires greater certainty to govern his Actions by, than what is as certain as his Actions themselves (lV.xi.8).
These passages support that, according to Locke, performing an action, such as eating pineapple, running a mile, or moving one’s arm, involves a distinctive experience which is not present when one merely thinks about an action, remembers an action, dreams about an action, or perceives the actions of others. This suggests that the initial performance of an action is accompanied by a distinctive inner experience, which provides a means for distinguishing my present actions from the actions of others, because when I am merely aware of actions of others I do not invest physical or cognitive labour and they lack the distinctive inner experience that accompanies my own actions.
To sum up, neither the performance of an action nor the awareness of action performance is by itself sufficient for action appropriation. In order for appropriation of present actions to take place, an individual needs to perform an action and be aware of performing the action and this awareness will be accompanied by an intimate experience that is distinctive of the physical and/or cognitive labour that one invests.42 This means that appropriation
Locke’s statement in ILxxvti.16 that I am accountable ‘for what I did the last moment’ supports the proposal the appropriation of present actions involves the performance of the action, because Locke does not merely claim that I am accountable for what I was conscious of the last moment. Similarly, he claims in ll.xxvii.26 that a person that committed actions shall deserve punishment. The view defended here differs from Ayers’s claim that ‘[ojur actions themselves...are ‘appropriated’ to us by an entirely natural and given principle of unity, namely consciousness, rather than by some acquisitive act of acknowledgement or ‘owning* on our part,’ (Locke, ii, 268). 1 believe that my interpretation can be defended against Ayers’s, because he does not carefully distinguish between the appropriation of present and past actions and generalizes the claim that past actions are appropriated by consciousness.
26
of present actions is not explained exclusively in terms of consciousness, because it additionally involves the performance of the action. Moreover, the conscious awareness that accompanies the performance of the action is intrinsically different from other conscious experiences that are not appropriated.
Let us turn to the appropriation of past actions. According to Locke, we appropriate past actions by consciousness (see II.xxvii.16, 26). The question to consider is whether and how appropriation of past actions by consciousness is sufficient to distinguish my past actions from the past actions of others. To answer this question we have to look deeper into Locke’s account of consciousness and memory. According to Locke, to be conscious of a past action is to remember the past action. As stated above, for Locke memory of a past action requires previous awareness of the action (see I.iv.20, II.x.2, 7).4j This means that when I remember a past action I remember having done or having perceived a past action rather than merely remembering that a past action took place.44 Given Locke’s understanding of memory and the proposed account of the appropriation of present actions, I want to suggest that a past action is appropriated on the basis of remembering the previous performance of the action, which includes remembering the distinctive inner experience that accompanied the performance of the action. If this is correct, then it is possible to distinguish my past actions from the past actions of others; My past actions are the actions that I appropriated previously by performing them and experiencing the performance of them. It follows that the appropriation of past actions is to be understood in terms of the initial appropriation and memory. This means that the appropriation of past actions is not another type of action appropriation, but rather it can be explained in terms of remembrance of the initial act of appropriation, which took place at the time when the action was performed.
" See also Garrett, ‘Locke on Personal Identity, Consciousness, and “Fatal Errors'",
','1 Locke's account of memory can be classified as episodic memory. For further details concerning different varieties of memory see Rebecca Copenhaver, ‘Thomas Reid’s Theory of Memory’, History of Philosophy Quarterly 23 (2006): 175-29.
27
As a consequence of this proposal one has to accept that subjects do not have a choice whether or not to appropriate a past action, but rather, if their memory presents a past action as performed by them, they have to acknowledge the action as their action,'*' As soon as one’s memory revives the initial act of appropriation and makes one aware again or the physical and/or cognitive labour that one invested, one acknowledges that one did the action and thereby appropriates it. However, it is a further question whether by appropriating a past action one acknowledges that one deserves reward or punishment for this action.
For instance, let us assume someone stole figs regularly from a fig tree in the neighbourhood. If we assume further that the person confessed the deed a few years later and properly repaid his or her neighbours for the damage, then this is a case where the person still acknowledges that he or she stole the figs and appropriates the action as his or her own, but does not any longer regard him- or herself as blameworthy. Locke might have anticipated such examples in II.xxvii.26 where he not only speaks of the appropriation of actions, but also of the appropriation of merit for them. This means that although when my memory presents a past action as done by me I cannot deny that I did the action, I may, nevertheless, have a choice as to whether I accept merit for the action. Unfortunately, Locke says very little concerning the appropriation of merit for actions and whether or not the appropriation of actions has to be considered separately from the appropriation of merit for actions will ultimately depend on the particular understanding of merit or reward and punishment.
So far I proposed an interpretation of the appropriation of present and past actions. Although Locke speaks explicitly only of the appropriation of actions (see II.xxvii.16, 26), it is worth considering whether and how this interpretation extends to the
Winkler makes a similar remark: ‘I do not wilfully disown one act and appropriate another; instead I accept what my consciousness reveals to me’ (‘Locke on Per*mad identity’, 206).
28
appropriation of thoughts.46 Any reader who is convinced that Locke’s account of appropriation is restricted to action appropriation can skip this part, because it is an additional component which supplements the account that I have given of action appropriation, but the account of action appropriation does not require it. According to my proposed interpretation, appropriation is a prerequisite for accountability and since some of our thoughts are morally significant it is plausible that one will not only be accountable and rewarded or punished for actions, but also for certain thoughts. In these cases it will be important to have a means of distinguishing my thoughts from the thoughts of others.
Let me begin with an example. The demonstration of a significant proposition can be a thought that deserves reward. Demonstrating a proposition will involve several individual steps and in each step of the proof one will invest cognitive labour and be aware of the cognitive labour one invests. Thus it can be said that by investing cognitive labour I make the demonstration my own. This suggests that the appropriation of a present demonstration can be understood by means of the cognitive effort one invests and one’s awareness of that effort. In analogy to the appropriation of actions, it is plausible that a demonstration will be appropriated at a later time by remembering the previous act of appropriation.47
To turn to another example, let us consider the invention of new things. According to Locke, ideas of modes are created in the mind. In contrast to ideas of substances, which are meant to represent real things in the world and capture the way the world is
46 Locke claims in various passages that a person is conscious of thoughts and actions (see ll.xxvji.9-10, 14-15, 19, 21,24). Here and in the following I follow Locke and use ‘thought’ in a broad sense, interchangeably with Locke’s equally broad term ‘perception’.
47 In JV.i.9 Locke observes that our memory of demonstrations often does not retain all the individual steps of a demonstration, but rather the memory merely retains a conviction of the proof. On tills basis, in order to appropriate a past demonstration it may be sufficient that one is still aware that one demonstrated a proposition by one’s own cognitive efforts even if one does not recall all the individual steps of the demonstration.
independent of us, it is up to the creative mind to combine any ideas into the idea of a complex mode (see ll.xxx, HI.v, lll.vi.46). Ideas of substances can be said to have a world-mind direction of fit, while ideas of modes have the opposite direction of fit, ‘We do not pick out something in the world and then design a mode idea to correspond to it. Rather, we design a mode idea to serve certain purposes and then use it to refer to anything out in the world that happens to answer to it’.48 Some ideas of modes exist in the mind, before any object corresponding to them exists in reality-. Printing is an example of such a mode, because the idea of printing had to be formed in the mind of the inventor before any printing machines were built (see II.xxii.9). People who invent new things invest cognitive labour when they combine several simple ideas into a new complex idea and as part of this process they consider mental images of the things they aim to invent. Inventions of new things are further examples that make it plausible to say that certain thoughts are appropriated by investing cognitive labour.
The examples of thoughts considered so far both involve activity of the person who has them. In such cases it is plausible that appropriation of present thoughts takes place by investing cognitive labour. However, not all thoughts are active. Many are passive. For example, I perceive many things passively. This raises the question whether and how passive thoughts are candidates for appropriation. Passive thoughts provide information and access to information, or the lack thereof, can be morally significant. For example, if I perceive that a child is in danger, then I will receive morally significant information. The content that the child is in danger is not sufficient to make the perception my own, because it can in principle be shared by other people. The appropriation of passive perceptions such as this can be explained in one of the following two ways: First, it can be
Antonia LoLordo. ‘Three Problems in Locke’s Ontology of Substance and Mode’, In Contemporary Perspectives on Early Modem Philosophy: Nature and Norms in Thought, ed. Martin Lenz and Anik Waldow (Dordrecht, 2013), 53. For a detailed discussion of Locke's distinction between modes and substances sec also LoLordo, Locke's Moral Man, 74 82.
30
suggested that the passive perception provides input that I then actively process, for instance, by actively reflecting on the situation and identifying ways to help. My active processing involves cognitive labour and as in the examples above appropriation can be said to consist in the cognitive labour that one invests.
Alternatively, one could draw attention to the inherent reflexivity of every perception. Locke argues in II.xxvii.9 that internal to the perception there is the perception that one has the perception.49 This internal reflexive element is a distinctive inner experience that makes the perception my perception. The suggestion is that perceptions are appropriated by having them, which builds on Locke’s claim that perceiving involves perceiving that one perceives (see II.xxvii.9). If I remember at a later time the previous perception, I will not merely remember that the child was in danger, but rather I will also remember my perceiving that the child was in danger. Thus, I will appropriate a past perception by remembering the previous appropriation of the perception.
This second model of appropriation is not restricted to passive thoughts. It can be extended to all thoughts. The view would be that all present thoughts are appropriated by having them and all past thoughts are appropriated by remembering the previous act of appropriation. While I believe that Locke’s text leaves room for this interpretation, I want to offer a reason in favour of the first proposal.
The first model offers an account of appropriation of thoughts that is analogous to Locke’s account of appropriation in Two Treatises. The view has the advantage that it can, in analogy to the account in Two Treatises, provide a basis for gaining particular rights with regard to appropriated thoughts, for instance, intellectual property rights. The cognitive labour that one invested can be seen as the basis for special rights with regard to the thoughts and thereby serve as a basis for reward or
w For further discussion see Thiel, The Early Modem Subject, 114-16; Shelley Weinberg, ‘The Coherence of Consciousness in Locke’s Essay', History of Philosophy Quarterly 25 (2008): 26.
31
lamiBftiM
punishment. If we adopted the second proposal, appropriation would not he a prerequisite for accountability and reward and punishment in any meaningful way. On the contrary, if active cognitive labour that a person invested is taken into consideration and if appropriation of thoughts is explained in terms of the cognitive labour that one invests, then we have a means to single out thoughts that are likely to have greater significance than others and be worthy of reward and punishment. Thereby the first model is suitable to offer an account of appropriation that is a prerequisite for accountability and reward and punishment, while the second is not.
My proposed interpretation of Locke’s account of appropriation in the Essay is analogous to Locke’s account of appropriation in Two Treatises. I believe that this is a strong feature of the interpretation and makes room for appropriation to play a distinctive role in Locke’s theory, because in the Essay appropriation distinguishes my thoughts and actions from the thoughts and actions of others and this is a prerequisite for moral accountability'.
§6. Appropriation and Persistence Conditions for Persons
If we accept the interpretation of appropriation that I have given, then it follows that appropriation is relevant for the constitution of a person at a time. That means at a time when a person initially appropriates a thought or action that thought or action becomes a constitutive part of the person he or she is. Since the appropriation of past thoughts or actions is to be explained in terms of the initial appropriation and memory, no new additional act of appropriation takes place at that later time or during the intermittent period.. Of course, Locke accepts that we appropriate past thoughts and actions, but the important point is that appropriation of past thoughts or actions can be traced back to the initial act of appropriation at the time when the action was performed or the thought was initially had and for this reason it is best understood as the revival of a previous appropriation, rather than a new appropriation. This is an important result, because it undermines the view that Locke’s account of the persistence
32
conditions is to be understood solely in terms of appropriation. The relations that explain why the earlier person is identical with the later person will be consciousness or memory relations, rather than self-standing relations of appropriation.
Since this point is crucial for distancing my interpretation from the so-called appropriation interpretation, let us look at the issues more closely. We can advance the debate by acknowledging the following distinctions: Persistence conditions are commonly expressed in terms of relations and we can distinguish the relation proper from the relata that stand in said relation. Psychological accounts of personal identity, including the memory
interpretation, maintain that the relevant relations are
psychological such as memory relations and that the relata are any thoughts, experiences, or actions one is or can be aware of. In principle, if appropriation provides the persistence conditions for persons, it can constitute or be part of the relation and/or the relata.
The discussion above has shown that the proposal that
appropriation is supposed to provide alternative self-standing relations over time lacks support. Locke emphasizes that personal identity consists in sameness of consciousness. This itself is a strong reason to accept that the relevant relations are
consciousness relations rather than relations of appropriation.'0 Although Mackie presents Locke’s theory as a theory of action appropriation he falls back to explaining the view in terms of psychological relations. Similarly Winkler argues that personal identity consists in co-consciousness or memory relations.
However, the second option is more promising, that is the view that appropriation helps to identify the relevant relata. While traditional psychological accounts of personal identity include any thoughts, experiences, or actions one is, or can be, aware of as potential relata, it can be argued that those droughts, experiences, and actions that one acknowledges as one’s own, or appropriates, should be given special weight. For instance, the relevant relata could be restricted to appropriated thoughts and
There is wide interpretive scope to spell out what exactly Lock« means by sameness o f consciousness.
33
actions. On this view, the relevant relata are a subset of those that traditional psychological interpretations take into consideration. Alternatively, appropriated thoughts and actions could be given more weight so that one’s identity as a person does not cease when one continues to he aware of formerly appropriated thoughts and actions, but has irretrievably forgotten other thoughts and actions that one observed and never appropriated. This view' differs from traditional psychological accounts, because it introduces a qualitative component in addition to the quantitative counting of the number of existing of psychological connections.
The advantage of these proposals is that they focus on candidates for morally significant thoughts and actions51 and take seriously Locke’s claim that ‘person’ is a forensic term (see II.xxvii.26). because, according to Locke, it is important that one acknowledges an action as one’s own in order to be held accountable for it (see Il.xxvii.22, 26),52 In this sense it can be said that appropriation is integrated into the persistence conditions for persons, but it is important to realize that it is built into the relata rather than the relations.
LoLordo is one of the few interpreters who endorses an appropriation interpretation, and it is worth commenting on how my proposal differs from her view. I believe that a main advantage of my proposal is that it achieves a new level of specificity that is lacking in LoLordo’s interpretation. According to her, ‘to extend your consciousness backward to an action is simply to appropriate it as your own or to impute it to yourself. This formulation is vague and can in principle be reconciled with either reading. However, had LoLordo intended to argue for the
51 1 use the expression ‘candidates for morally significant thoughts and actions', because all morally significant thoughts and actions will be among the appropriated thoughts and actions, but not all appropriated thoughts and actions need to be morally significant.
Yaffe acknowledges that the appropriation interpretation can better accommodate Locke's claim that ‘person' is a forensic term than the memory interpretation. See Yaffe, ‘Locke on Ideas of Identity and Diversity*, 222-23.
' " LoLordo, Ijxke 'x Moral Man, 70,
34
view that the proper place for appropriation is in the relata, then her initial characterization of the view should be refined to make this explicit.
One further point of difference is worth noting. LoLordo systematically rules out that there is misappropriation. If we adopt my distinctions, 1 prefer to rephrase the issue as the question of whether misrepresentations of one’s past thoughts or actions are possible. On my interpretation this depends on the relations that connect the originally appropriated action with one’s current revival of the original action appropriation. Since my account of appropriation is consistent with different views regarding the relations that constitute the persistence conditions— for example, the relevant relations could be memory relations, psychological relations, causal relations, or a metaphysical fact of consciousness—the possibility of misrepresentation should not be systematically excluded, but rather it will depend on one’s account of the relevant relations. The important point for present purposes is that the question whether Locke’s theory leaves room for misrepresentation is independent from Locke’s account of appropriation. Consequently, there is no reason to dismiss the importance of appropriation in Locke’s theory due to the possibility of misrepresentation.54
The discussion so far has shown that the so-called appropriation interpretation lacks support, or, at least, it is vague. In contrast to this, the view' that appropriation is to be located within the relata is more precise and has the further advantage that it does not regard appropriation as a rival to the different interpretations of Locke’s persistence conditions for persons such as memory interpretations, psychological interpretations, or Weinberg’s metaphysical fact account of consciousness.'' ' While,
M It follows that the dispute between LoLordo and Weinberg concerning the possibility of misappropriation does not directly concern appropriation. See LoLordo, Locke’s Moral Man, 72-74. Weinberg responds to these passages in ‘Author Meets Critics on Antonia LoLordo’s "Locke’s Moral Man": Shelley Weinberg’. See also LoLordo's response in ‘Author Meets Critics on Antonia LoLordo’s "Locke’s Moral Man": LoLordo’s Reply to Weinberg’.
"5 Weinberg argues in her work that Locke’s account of personal identity involves an objective metaphysical fact of consciousness. According to her, God needs to be able
35
for example, memory interpretations (or psychological interpretations more generally) and Weinberg’s metaphysical fact interpretation are commonly presented as exclusive interpretations, appropriation, understood as proposed above, can be reconciled with either view. Regarding the former view, it can be said that memory relations connect appropriated thoughts actions at different times. Regarding the latter, a metaphysical fact of consciousness can be said to connect appropriated thoughts and actions. This is a promising result, because my interpretation provides a distinctive place for appropriation in Locke's theory and offers an explanation of why others who rejected or neglected appropriation were mistaken to do so.5fi
University College Dublin
to look at an objective fact when he rectifies failures of human justice at the Great Day. She maintains that the advantage of her interpretation is that it takes Locke’s religious commitments seriously and that it is not subject to die problems that arise for memory interpretations. See Weinberg, “Locke on Personal Identity,” “The Metaphysical Fact.”
5i> 1 am grateful to Martha Brandt Bolton, Michael Della Rocca, James Harris, Antonia LoLordo, Kathryn Tabb, Shelley Weinberg, Kenneth Winkler, Joshua Wood and my anonymous referees of this and other journals for helpful comments on earlier version of this paper. I presented this work at the South Central Seminar in Early Modem Philosophy at Texas A&M University in November 2011 and would like to thank my audience for helpful feedback.
References
Allen, Keith. ‘Cudworth on Mind, Body, and Plastic Nature’, Philosophy Compass 8 (2013): 337-47.
Atherton, Margaret. ‘Locke’s Theory of Personal Identity’, Midwest Studies in Philosophy 8 {1983): 273-93.
Ayers, Michael, Locke: Epistemology and Ontology. 2 vols. London: Routledge, 1991.
Behan, David P. ‘Locke on Persons and Personal Identity’, Canadian Journal of Philosophy 9 (1979): 53—75.
Berkeley, George. Alciphron, or The Minute Philosopher. In A. A. Luce and T. E. Jessop (Eds.), The Works of George Berkeley Bishop of Cloyne, vol 3. London: Thomas Nelson and Sons, 1950,
Boeker, Ruth. ‘The Moral Dimension in Locke’s Account of Persons and
36
Personal Identity’, History of Philosophy Quarterly 31 (2014): 229—47.
Buckle, Stephen. Natural Law and the Theory of Property; Grotius to Hume. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1991.
Copenhaver, Rebecca. ‘Thomas Reid’s Theory of Memory’, History of Philosophy Quarterly 23 (2006): 171-89.
Day, J. P. ‘Self-Ownership’, The Locke Newsletter 20 (1989): 77-85,
Flew, Anthony. ‘Locke and the Problem of Personal Identity’, Philosophy 26(1951): 53-68.
Garrett, Don. ‘Locke on Personal Identity, Consciousness, and “Fatal Errors’”, Philosophical Topics 31 (2003): 95-125.
Grotius, Hugo. On the Law of War and Peace. Edited by Stephen C. Neff. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2012.
Jolley, Nicholas. Locke: His Philosophical Thought. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999.
Law, Edmund. ‘A Defence of Mr. Locke’s Opinion Concerning Personal Identity’, in vol. 2 of The Works of John Locke. 12th ed. London: Rivington, 1824.
Locke, John. An Essay concerning Hitman Understanding. Edited by Peter H. Nidditch. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1975,
Locke, John. Political Essays. Edited by Mark Goldie, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997.
Locke, John. Two Treatises of Government. Edited by Peter Laslett. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988.
Locke, John. Writings on Religion. Edited by Victor Nuovo. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2002.
LoLordo, Antonia. ‘Author Meets Critics on Antonia LoLordo’s “Locke’s Moral Man": LoLordo’s Reply to Weinberg’, The Mod Squad: A Group Blog in Modern Philosophy, June 25, 2014,
http://philosophymodsquad.wordpress.com/2013/07/Q7/ante-Imm- lolordos-reply-to-weinberg/,
LoLordo, Antonia. Locke’s Moral Man. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2012.
LoLordo, Antonia. ‘Three Problems in Locke’s Ontology of Substance and Mode’. In Contemporary Perspectives on Early Modem Philosophy: Nature and Norms in Thought, edited by Martin Lett/ and Anik Waldow. Dordrecht: Springer, 2013, 51-64.
Lowe, E, J, Locke on Human Understanding. Abingdon, Qxon: Rout!edge, 1995,
Mackie, J. L. Problems from Locke, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1976.
Matthews, Eric. ‘Descartes and Locke on the Concept of a Person’, The Locke Newsletter 8 (1977); 9-34.
Mautner, Thomas. ‘Locke’s Own’, The Locke Newsletter 22 (1991), 73- 80.
37
Oiivecrona, Karl. ‘Appropriation in the State of Nature: Locke on the Origin of Property’, Journal of the History of Ideas 35 (1974): 211-30. Oiivecrona, Karl. ‘Locke’s Theory of Appropriation’, The Philosophical Quarterly 24 (1974), 220-34.
Noonan. Harold W. Personal Identity. 2nd ed. Abingdon, Oxon: Routledge, 2003.
Parfit, Derek. Reasons and Persons. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1984. Pufendorf, Samuel. Of the Law of Nature and Nations. Translated by Basil Kennen and George Carew, edited by Jean Barbeyrac. London: Printed for J. Walthoe, R. Wilkin, J. and J. Bonwicke, S. Birt, T. Ward, and T. Osborne, 1729.
Reid, Thomas. Essays on the Intellectual Powers of Man. Edited by Derek R. Brookes. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2002.
Schechtman, Mary a. The Constitution of Selves. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1996.
Spector, Jessica. ‘The Grounds of Moral Agency: Locke’s Account of Persona] Identity’, Journal of Moral Philosophy 5 (2008): 256-81. Stanton, Timothy. ‘Christian Foundations; or Some Loose Stones? Toleration and the Philosophy of Locke’s Politics’. Critical Review of International Social and Political Philosophy 14 (2011): 323—47. Strawson, Galen. Locke on Personal Identity: Consciousness and Concernment. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2011.
Stuart, Matthew. Locke’s Metaphysics. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2033.
Thiel, Udo. Lockes Theorie der personalen Identität. Bonn: Bouvier Verlag, 1983.
Thiel, Udo. The Early Modem Subject: Self-Consciousness and Personal Identity from Descartes to Hume. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011.
Tully, James. A Discourse on Property: Locke and his Adversaries.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1980.
Weinberg, Shelley'. ‘Author Meets Critics on Antonia LoLordo’s “Locke’s Moral Man”: Shelley Weinberg’, The Mod Squad: A Group Blog in Modem Philosophy, June 25, 2014,
http://philosophymodsijuad.wordpress.com/2013/07/06/amc-lmm- shelley-wemberg/.
Weinberg, Shelley. ‘Locke on Persona! Identity’, Philosophy Compass 6
(2011) : 398-407.
Weinberg. Shelley, ‘The Coherence of Consciousness in Locke’s Essay’, History of Philosophy Quarterly 25 (2008): 21-39.
Weinberg, Shelley. ‘The Metaphysical Fact of Consciousness in Locke’s Theory of Personal Identity ’, Journal of the History of Philosophy, 50
(2012) ; 387 415
38
Winkler, Kenneth P. ‘Locke on Personal Identity’, Journal of the History of Philosophy 29 (1991): 201-26.
Yaffe, Gideon. ‘Locke on ideas of Identity and Diversity’. In The Cambridge Companion to Locke's "Essay concerning Human Understanding”, edited by Lex Newman. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007, 192-230.
Yolton, John W. Locke: An Introduction, Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1985.
Zack, Naomi. ‘Locke’s Identity Meaning of Ownership’, The Locke Newsletter 23 (1992): 105-13.
39
WEBSITES
Visit our website
www.lockestudies.oig/
See also
www.libraries.psu.edu/tas/loeke/
for the John Locke bibliography, list of manuscripts, and chronology, compiled by John Attig of Penn State University.
The database for Locke’s medical reading and medical books described in Medical History, 42 (1997), 473-86, by the late Professor G G Meynell, and available at the Wellcome Library, London, can also be found at
www.haven.u-net.com
For the Digital Locke Project of Locke’s manuscripts, directed by Dr Paul Schuurman, see
www.digitallockeproject.nl/
LOCKE ON KNOWLEDGE OF EXISTENCE
Nathan Rockwood §1. The Standard Objection
The standard objection to Locke’s epistemology is that his conception of knowledge inevitably leads to skepticism about external objects.1 One reason for this complaint is that Locke defines knowledge as the perception of a relation between ideas, but perceiving relations between ideas does not seem like the kind of thing that can give us knowledge that tables and chairs exist. Thus Locke’s general definition of knowledge seems to be woefully inadequate for explaining knowledge of external objects. However, this interpretation and subsequent criticism ignore a special category of knowledge Locke calls ‘real knowledge’, which is Locke’s own account of how we can have knowledge of the real world. Rather than evaluating whether Locke’s definition of knowledge in general can get us knowledge of external objects, we should instead focus our attention on whether Locke’s account of real knowledge can explain how we have knowledge of external objects.
Lex Newman has taken one step in the right direction by recognizing that sensitive knowledge (i.e., knowledge from sense perception) that material objects exist is a kind of real knowledge (Newman 2004 and 2007). Perceiving a relation between ideas is necessary but not sufficient for real knowledge. According to Newman, real knowledge that a material object exists requires that, in addition to the perception of a relation between ideas, we make a probabilistic judgment that our idea of the object corresponds to a material object. It is important to Newman’s interpretation, for reasons that will be explained below, that only sensitive knowledge of material objects counts as a kind of real knowledge that external objects exist. However, Locke’s account
1 For purposes af this paper ‘external object* will he any object outside of our ideas (including ourselves, God, and material objects).
41
of sensitive knowledge tails within the broader category of knowledge of existence; this category also includes knowledge of our own existence by intuition and knowledge of God’s existence by demonstration. So Newman’s interpretation of real knowledge cannot explain how, in general, Locke thinks we can have knowledge of the existence of external objects.
My proposal builds on Newman’s suggestion that sensitive knowledge is a kind of real knowledge, but I show how Locke’s account of real knowledge extends to all three kinds of knowledge of existence (i.e., intuitive knowledge of our own existence, demonstrative knowledge of God’s existence, and sensitive knowledge that material objects exist). I take that second requirement for real knowledge to be the relation between ideas and reality,2 whereas Newman holds that it is the judgment that there is such a relation. In particular, I argue that real knowledge requires that there be a conformity between our ideas and reality. On this interpretation all three kinds of knowledge of existence count as real knowledge (whereas for Newman only sensitive knowledge counts as real knowledge). So I am able to show how, in genera], Locke’s account of real knowledge can give us knowledge of the existence of external objects.
The view I attribute to Locke can be called the Dual Relation View since, on this interpretation, knowledge of existence includes both the perception of one relation between ideas and a second relation between those ideas and an external object. The ideas we perceive to agree will be different in each of the three kinds of knowledge of existence.3 In each case, though, there is a
2 A few commentators have taken Locke’s account of sensitive knowledge to consist, at least in part, in the relation between sensation and an external object (Ayers 1991, i, 62 and 159; Bolton 2004, 304-7; Wilson 2014, 426 and 443). However, these commentators have taken this relation between an idea and an external object to apply only to sensitive knowledge, whereas I show that knowledge that we exist and knowledge that God exists also includes a relation between ideas and reality. I also argue that such knowledge counts as real knowledge.
J As 1 interpret Ixtcke, in knowledge of my own existence I perceive an agreement between the idea of myself thinking and the idea of my existence (cf. note 13, below), and in demonstrative knowledge of my own existence the idea of myself thinking and
42
conformity between the perceived ideas and the actual existence of an external object. It is because these ideas conform to reality that Locke thinks the perception of these ideas can give us knowledge that an external object exists. Thus Locke’s account of real knowledge explains why he thinks we can have knowledge that external objects exist.
§2. The Ideas-Only View
The problem of how Locke can claim to know anything about external objects arises from Locke’s official definition of knowledge:
Knowledge then seems to me to be nothing but the perception of the connexion and agreement, or disagreement and repugnancy of any of our ideas. (E IV.i.2, 525)
Locke defines knowledge as the perception of a relation (either an agreement or a disagreement) between ideas. The next section is titled ‘This Agreement Fourfold’ (E IV.i.3, 525). By ‘this agreement’ Locke means the perceived relation between ideas discussed in the prior section (E IV.i.2, 525). In order to ‘understand a little more distinctly, wherein this agreement or disagreement consists’, he says, ‘I think we may reduce it all to these four sorts’; importantly, the fourth sort is ‘real existence’ (E IV.i.3, 525). Since knowledge is defined as the perception of a relation between ideas, and ‘real existence’ is listed as one of the perceived relations, we expect knowledge of real existence to be the perception of a relation between ideas.
But what Locke actually says defies our expectations. When he gets to the fourth sort of relation, he says:
The fourth and last sort is, that of actual real existence agreeing to any idea (E lV,i.7, 527, my emphasis)
the idea of God's existence. In sensitive knowledge that a material object exists, the idea of having a sensation agrees with the idea of an external object causing the sensation (of. footnote 14).
Call the fourth sort of relation described here the ‘real- existence relation*. This relation appears to be a relation between an idea and an external object (an ‘actual real existence’). So, contrary to our expectations, the fourth sort of relation does not appear to be a perceived relation between ideas.
One way to resolve the tension between Locke’s definition of knowledge and his description of the real-existence relation is to insist that the real-existence relation is a relation between ideas. The motivation for this interpretation comes from two considerations. First, knowledge is the perception of a relation between ideas. Second, the context suggests that the real- existence relation in E IV.i.7 is that perceived relation. So when Locke describes the real-existence relation as ‘actual real existence agreeing to any idea* (E IV.i.7, 527), he might mean to say that the real-existence relation is between ‘the idea of real existence and the idea of any thing* (Owen 2008, part 2, my emphasis; cf. Allen 2013, 256; Nagel 2016). Call this the Ideas- Only View, since knowledge of existence consists solely in perceiving a relation between ideas.
However, even the proponents of the Ideas-Only View concede that the phrase ‘actual real existence agreeing to any idea’ (E IV.i.7, 527) seems to be describing a relation between an idea and an external object. David Owen says, ‘The natural way to understand this is as the agreement between the thing itself (the actual real existent) and the idea of the thing’ (Owen 2008, part 2). Jennifer Nagel likewise acknowledges that Locke’s emphasis on ‘actual’ and ‘real’ suggests that ‘actual real existence’ refers to an external object rather than the idea of existence (Nagel 2016, 316). Newman reports that it is a ‘widespread opinion’ that the relation is ‘not between two ideas, but between an idea and an actual real existence* (Newman 2007, 331). 4 So they acknowledge that the most straightforward interpretation of the passage is that the real-existence relation is between an idea and an external object.
4 Although Newman does not hold the Ideas-Only View, he interprets the real- existence relation in E IV.i.7 as a relation between ideas (Newman 2007, 331).
44
Indeed, Locke uses similar language elsewhere to describe a relation between an idea and an external object. For instance, real ideas ‘have a conformity’ with external objects (E II.xxx.l, 372), and he argues that all simple ideas are real because they ‘all agree to the reality of things'’ (E II.xxx.2, 372, my emphasis). In other passages he uses phrases such as ‘agree to real existence’ (E II,xxxii.22, section heading, 392) and ‘agree with the existence of things’ (E II.xxx.5, section heading, 374).5 All these passages refer to a relation between an idea and an external object. The similarity of these passages with the description of the real- existence relation as ‘actual real existence agreeing to any idea’ suggests that, as in those other passages, Locke is here describing a relation between an idea and an external object.
Similarly, there are other passages where Locke uses ‘real existence’ to refer to an external object. For example, he argues that nothing cannot ‘ever produce any real existence’’ (E IV.x.8, 622, my emphasis). Also, he says that ideas of modes are ‘made by the mind...without patterns, or reference to any real existence’ (E III.v.3, 429, my emphasis), and they are ‘not copies, nor made after the pattern of any real existence, to which the mind intends them to be conformable’ (E II.xxxi.14, 384, my emphasis). Each of these instances of ‘real existence’ refers to an external object. This provides further evidence that Locke intends ‘actual real existence’ to refer to an external object rather than the idea of existence. So there are close textual parallels showing that ‘actual real existence agreeing to any idea’ describes a relation between an idea and an external object.
One might insist that, despite the strained reading of E IV.i.7, Locke's definition of knowledge commits him to the view that the perception of a relation between ideas is the one and only one condition for knowledge of existence. For he defines knowledge as the perception of a relation between ideas, and then he says: ‘Where this perception is, there is knowledge; and where it is not,..we always come short of knowledge” (E IV.i.2, 525). The
5 cf. E II.xxxii.22, 392; TH.ix.12,482; IV.iv.3, 563; and iV.iv.18. 573.
45
perception of a relation between ideas is necessary and sufficient for knowledge. It is necessary because where we do not perceive a relation between ideas ‘we always come short of knowledge’; it is sufficient because where we do perceive a relation between ideas ‘there is knowledge’. Given that the perception of a relation between ideas is by itself necessary and sufficient for knowledge, there is reason to think that on Locke’s view there is only one requirement for knowledge of existence (cf. Soles 1985, 353).
But this interpretation ignores the category of ‘real knowledge’. Locke anticipates the objection that if knowledge consists solely in the perception of a relation between ideas then we cannot have knowledge of the actual world. He imagines an objector saying:
If it be hue, that all knowledge lies only in the perception of the agreement or disagreement of our own ideas, the visions of an enthusiast, and the reasoning of a sober man, will be equally certain. ’77s no matter how things are: so [long as] a man observe but the agreement of his own imaginations...it is all truth, all certainty. (E IV.iv.l, 563, my emphasis)
He introduces real knowledge as a way to account for our knowledge of the actual world; this is his answer to the objection that the perception of a relation between ideas cannot give us knowledge ‘of things as they really are’ (E IV.iv.l, 563). He says:
Our knowledge therefore is real, only so far as there is a conformity between our ideas and the reality of things. (E IV.iv.3, 563, my emphasis)
The perception of a relation between ideas is necessary but not sufficient for real knowledge. In addition to the perception of a relation between ideas, real knowledge requires that there is also a conformity between our ideas and reality. Thus there are two requirements for real knowledge. Real knowledge opens up the possibility that knowledge of existence includes a second requirement, namely a conformity relation between ideas and reality. Moreover, the real-existence relation described in E lV.i.7 as ‘actual real existence agreeing to any idea’ might be an expression of’this second requirement for real knowledge. On this
46
interpretation, knowledge of real existence is a kind of real knowledge that requires both the perception of a relation between ideas and a conformity relation between ideas and reality,
Keith Allen, however, argues that knowledge of existence is not a kind of real knowledge. On his interpretation, ‘real knowledge concerns the nature of things’, while knowledge of existence ‘concerns their existence’. He contends that Locke’s chapter on real knowledge ‘specifically concerns abstract general knowledge, and not particular knowledge of existence’ (Allen 2013, 253). Much of the chapter concerns mathematical and moral knowledge (E IV.iv.5-10, 564-68), which is concerned with the perception of relations between abstract ideas rather than with particular existences. Similarly, much of the discussion of substance is spent debating about how to categorize changelings and monsters (E IV.iv.14-17, 569-73), indicating that in this chapter Locke is interested in types of substances. Finally, when he later discusses knowledge of existence he says, ‘Hitherto we have only considered the essences of things, which being only abstract ideas, and removed in our thoughts from particular existence...gives us no knowledge of real existence at aU’ (E IV.ix.l, 618). Hence, Allen concludes, knowledge of existence does not appear to be a kind of real knowledge (Allen 2013, 253).
But, in reply to Allen, Locke holds that there are two kinds of real knowledge. For, according to Locke, ideas can conform to reality in two ways: ‘by real ideas, I mean...such as have a conformity with real being, and existence of other things, or with their archetypes’ (E II.xxx.l, 372). Some ideas represent external objects, and these ideas conform to reality by conforming to the external objects they represent. Other ideas are ‘archetypes of the mind’s own making, not intended to be the copies of anything, nor referred to the existence of anything’ (E IV.iv.5, 564). Allen is right that the perception of the latter kind of real ideas, archetypes of the mind’s own making, does not concern knowledge of existence. But the perception of the former kind of real ideas (which requires a conformity between an idea and an external object) is relevant to knowledge of existence.
47
Further, on Locke’s view we can have real knowledge of particular substances. In his exchange with Stillingfleet about the grounds for certain knowledge that God exists, Locke cites his account of real knowledge, which in the Essay he ‘delivered in these words':
Wherever we perceive tine agreement or disagreement of any of our ideas, there is certain knowledge; and wherever we are sure those ideas agree with the reality of things, there is certain real knowledge. Of which agreement of our ideas with the reality of things, I think I have shown wherein that certainty1, real certainty, consists. (W4: 50, my emphasis; cf. E lV.iv.18. 5 73)
Locke here quotes his account of real knowledge as the grounds for our certainty that God exists. So, contrary to Allen’s claim, we can have real knowledge that a particular substance exists. It appears, then, that there are two requirements for knowledge of existence.
As a final consideration against attributing the Ideas-Only View to Locke, he denies that the perception of a relation between ideas is by itself sufficient for knowing that God actually exists. Descartes, for example, argues that there is a necessary connection between the idea of God and the idea of existence, and from this he concludes that God actually exists. But on Locke’s view, even if the idea of God necessarily contains the idea of existence that still would not prove that God actually exists:
Though the complex idea for which the sound God stands (whether containing in it the idea of necessary existence or no, for the case is the same) will not prove the real existence of a being answering to that idea, any more than any other idea in any one’s mind will prove the existence of any real being answering that idea (W4: 55)
Showing that the idea of God is contained in the idea of existence (and thus the idea of existence is necessarily connected to the idea of God) does not prove that God actually exists. Now, Locke does think that one can give a demonstration of God’s existence (E IV.x.2-6, 619 21), and a demonstration is the
48
perception of a relation between a chain of ideas (ef. E IV,ii.2~3, 531-32; IV.iii.2, 539). So he does think that the perception of a relation between ideas can give us knowledge that God exists. But, given that Locke makes this criticism of Descartes’ ontological argument, he cannot say that the perception of a relation between ideas is by itself sufficient for knowledge that God actually exists. Some further condition must be met (below I argue that further condition is a necessary connection between the perceived ideas and God’s actual existence). The implication for the Ideas-Only View is obvious: Locke denies that perceiving a relation between ideas is by itself sufficient for knowledge that an object (such as God) exists, and hence he does not hold the Ideas- Only View.
The Ideas-Only View fails in an instructive way. One problem for the Ideas-Only View is that the real-existence relation described in E IV.i.7 as ‘actual real existence agreeing to any idea’ does not describe a relation between ideas; instead, it describes a relation between an idea and an external object. Thus we should reject the view, based on this misinterpretation of E IV.i.7, that in knowledge of existence the two ideas that are perceived to agree are the idea of the object and the idea of existence. A second problem for the Ideas-Only View is that Locke denies that knowledge of the existence of God consists solely in the perception of a relation between ideas. There must therefore be some further requirement for knowledge that an external object actually exists. Fortunately, both of these problems can be solved together by taking the real-existence relation to hold between an idea and an external object. According to the Dual Relation View, the real-existence relation described in E IV.i.7 is an expression of a second requirement for knowledge of existence: namely, an idea must be related to the actual existence of an external object. This retains the most plausible interpretation of ‘actual real existence agreeing to any idea’ as a relation between an idea and an external object, and it provides Locke’s account of knowledge of existence with a second requirement for knowledge of existence.
49
Yet the Ideas-Only View gets something important right. The definition of knowledge entails that in knowledge of existence we perceive some relation between ideas. Locke elsewhere identifies the two ideas that we perceive to be related, which again shows that knowledge of existence includes the perception of some relation between ideas. But the real-existence relation described in E fV.i.7 is not that perceived relation. The Ideas-Only View goes wrong in assuming that there is only one requirement for knowledge of existence, which leads to the implausible interpretation of ‘actual real existence agreeing to any idea’ as a relation between ideas. The important thing to learn here, I suggest, is that Locke’s account of knowledge of existence includes two relations.
§3. The Second Requirement for Real Knowledge
Locke’s account of real knowledge offers a promising direction for interpreting his account of knowledge of existence. For real knowledge is supposed to explain how it is that we have knowledge of the actual world, and knowledge of existence is knowledge about the actual w'orld. He even indicates that knowledge that God exists is a kind of real knowledge. There are good reasons, then, for turning to Locke’s account of real knowledge as a way of understanding his view on knowledge of existence.
Newman points out that Locke introduces real knowledge as a way to ensure that our knowledge of the world corresponds to the way the world actually is (Newman 2007, 333). On his interpretation, real knowledge requires that, in addition to the perception of a relation between ideas, we make a fallible judgment that our ideas correspond to an external object. He then argues that sensitive knowledge (i.e. knowledge from sensation that material objects exist) is a kind of real knowledge. He calls this the Dual Cognitive Model since sensitive knowledge includes two cognitive components: as a kind of knowledge, we perceive a relation between ideas; as a kind of probable judgment, we presume that our sensations correspond to an external object that causes that sensation (Newman 2007, 325),
50
Locke takes real knowledge to be knowledge where ‘there is a conformity between our ideas and the reality of things’ (E IV.iv.3, 563). Newman points out that Locke uses the term ‘assurance’ and its cognate ‘sure’ to describe our epistemic status to this conformity between ideas and reality (cf. E IV.iv.3, 563 and E IV.iv.18, 573). Locke sometimes uses the term ‘assurance’ to refer to a kind of probable judgment (e.g. E IV.xvi.6, 662).6 So, Newman suggests, these passages imply that real knowledge includes a judgment that our ideas correspond to reality (Newman 2007, 348-49). On this view, sensitive knowledge includes both the perception of a relation between ideas and a judgment that our sensation corresponds to an external object.
One attractive feature of the Dual Cognitive Model is that it explains why Locke takes sensitive knowledge to be less certain than intuitive and demonstrative knowledge. On this model, sensitive knowledge is a kind of knowledge because it includes the perception of a relation between ideas, yet it is less certain than other forms of knowledge because sensitive knowledge includes a fallible judgment that our sensation is caused by an external object (Newman 2007, 325). So the Dual Cognitive Model can simultaneously explain why sensitive knowledge counts as knowledge and also why it is less certain than other forms of knowledge.
But this attractive feature also prevents the Dual Cognitive Model from extending to other kinds of knowledge of existence (cf. Allen 2013, 255). The Dual Cognitive Model includes a fallible judgment that an idea corresponds to an external object, and this fallible judgment is what makes sensitive knowledge less certain than intuitive and demonstrative knowledge. If this model were extended to knowledge of our own existence and knowledge of God’s existence, then these items of knowledge would (like sensitive knowledge) merit only the third degree of certainty'. But surely this is not Locke’s intent: knowledge that we exist
6 For exceptions, see E tV.i.9. 528; IV.ii.6, 533; IV.vUQ, 584; lV.x.2, 618 (cf, Owen 2008, part 3; Rockwood 2013, 21).
51
‘comc[sj not short of the highest degree of certainty'’ (E lV.ix.3, 619, my emphasis), and we know that God exists by demonstration which is the second degree of certainty (E IV.hi.21. 552 and IV.ii.2, 531); and he affirms that we are more certain that we exist and that God exists than we are that material objects exist (E IV.xi.2. 631). So knowledge that we exist and knowledge that God exists cannot include a probabilistic judgment that makes these items of knowledge less certain. Since Locke indicates that such knowledge counts as real knowledge, yet reaches the highest degrees of certainty, we have good reason to suspect that Newman has gone wrong in taking the second requirement for real knowledge to be a probabilistic judgment.
Aaron Wilson develops a similar interpretation to the Dual Cognitive Model, and his interpretation has a similar problem. Wilson argues that there are both internalist and externalist requirements for sensitive knowledge7 (in this his view resembles the Dual Relation View I am arguing for in this paper). The internalist requirements include the perception of a relation between the relevant ideas, and an assurance that our sensations are caused by external objects (Wilson 2014, 438, 443). Both of the internalist requirements are elements in Newman’s Dual Cognitive Model. What Wilson adds, though (cf. Wilson 2014, p. 443), are two externalist requirements:
1. the sensation of the object must actually be caused by an external
object, and
2, the sensation of an object must be a “very reliable” indicator that an
object actually exists.
Wilson argues that sensitive knowledge is less certain than intuitive and demonstrative knowledge because sensation is
Wilson characterizes the internalist-externalist distinction within Locke’s framework: an internalist requirement for knowledge is ‘something internal to our ideas and perceptions’ that is necessary for {at least some) knowledge, whereas an externalist requirement would ire ‘something external to our ideas and perceptions’ that is necessary for (at least some) knowledge (Wilson 2014, 426).
52
merely a reliable indicator of an actual external object. On the one hand, if the sensation of an object were necessarily connected to the actual existence of an external object causing that sensation, then it would be ‘unclear why...the assurance [that the object exists] is not as great as the certainty of intuitive knowledge’. On the other hand, ‘the possibility of perceptual error would account for this deficiency’ in our assurance that an external object actually exists (Wilson 2014, 438). So, according to Wilson, the highly reliable connection (but not necessary connection) between a sensation and an external object causing that sensation explains why sensitive knowledge is less certain than other forms of knowledge.8
Unfortunately, Wilson’s interpretation cannot extend to all three kinds of knowledge of existence. On his interpretation.
Sensitive knowledge is very different from the [other degrees of knowledge] because its epistemic conditions—i.e. what Locke thinks makes it knowledge—are very different front the epistemic conditions for intuitive and demonstrative knowledge...In the case of intuitive and demonstrative knowledge, the epistemic conditions seem entirely internal; but in the case of sensitive knowledge, some of the epistemic conditions are external. (Wilson 2014, 426)
Sensitive knowledge alone has externalist conditions. So Wilson’s interpretation excludes the possibility that knowledge of our own existence and knowledge of God’s existence also depends on satisfying the externalist requirements for knowledge. Further, since one of the requirements is that there be a reliable (but not necessary) connection between the relevant ideas and the external object, satisfying this condition would thereby make knowledge of our own existence and knowledge of God’s existence less certain than other forms of knowledge. But we have seen that the opposite is the case. Wilson’s interpretation, then, cannot explain how Locke thinks we attain knowledge of all
8 Martha Bolton also argues that, for Locke, the reliability of the senses gives us sensitive knowledge that external objects exist (Bolton 2004,304 7).
53
three kinds of knowledge of existence.
What we need is an inteipretation of real knowledge that can extend to all three kinds of knowledge of existence. So the further requirement for real knowledge that an external object cannot be, as Newman contends, a probabilistic judgment that our ideas conform to reality; nor, as Wilson contends, can the externalist requirement for knowledge that an external object exist be a reliable (hut not necessary) connection between the relevant ideas and the external object. Below I argue that the second requirement for real knowledge is the relation (not the judgment of the relation) between our ideas and reality, and that this relation is a necessary* connection (not a merely reliable one). This interpretation can extend to all three kinds of knowledge of existence without thereby making knowledge of our own existence and know! edge of God’s existence less certain. Further, it is because of this necessary connection between our ideas and reality', I will claim, that Locke thinks the perception of the relevant ideas gives us real knowledge that the object actually exists.
§4. The Dual Relation View
In §2 above we saw that Locke’s definition of knowledge entails that knowledge of existence must include the perception of a relation between ideas. Yet we also saw' that he does not take the perception of a relation between ideas by itself to be sufficient for knowledge that an object actually exists. In this section I will argue that the further requirement needed for knowledge of existence is a necessary connection between the perception of the relevant ideas and the actual existence of the external object.
There are lwro reasons for thinking that knowledge of existence includes a relation between ideas and reality. First, the second requirement for real knowledge is the relation between ideas and reality. Locke says, ‘Our knowledge therefore is real only so Jar as there is a conformity between our ideas and the reality of things (E IV.iv.3, 563, my emphasis). Similarly, he says that ‘this conformity between our simple ideas, and the existence of things, is sufficient for real knowledge’ (E IV.iv.4, 564, my
54
emphasis),9 It is the conformity relation between the idea and the external object (not the judgment of the relation) that is sufficient to make it real knowledge. While we may make a judgment that our ideas conform to reality (which explains his use of ‘assurance’ and its cognates), real knowledge does not consist in making this judgment. The second requirement for real knowledge, then, is that our ideas conform to reality. Knowledge of existence is a kind of real knowledge, so real knowledge requires that there be a conformity relation between the ideas and reality.
Second, Locke implies that knowledge of existence includes the real-existence relation, and he describes the real-existence relation as ‘actual real existence agreeing to any idea’ (E IV.i.7). As I argued above (in §2), this real-existence relation is a relation between an idea and an external object. In fact, his description of the real existence relation can be seen as an expression of the second requirement for real knowledge. He sometimes describes the relation in real knowledge as a ‘conformity’ 10 11 and he sometimes describes the relation as an ‘agreement’.[ t This is consistent with Locke’s language use, since he sometimes uses ‘agree’ and ‘conform’ interchangeably.12 So the real-existence
9 Locke’s comment here may suggest that the perception of a relation between ideas is not necessary (since he seems to say that the conformity is by itself sufficient). But the passage does not need to be read this way. I take it that Locke is assuming that we are talking about knowledge (t.e., the perception of a relation between ideas), and a conformity of the ideas in knowledge is sufficient to make that knowledge count as real knowledge.
10 E IV.iv.3, 4, 5, 8, 11, and 12 (563-68).
11 E IV.iv.2 (section heading), 3,6,9,12 (section heading), and 18 (563-73),
12 Locke talks about ‘whether the action agrees or disagrees with a rule', and then immediately rephrases this as ‘either conformity or not conformity of any action, to that rule’ (E ll.xvili.14, 358). Apparently agreeing to a rule is the same as conforming to a rule, and disagreeing with a rule is not conforming to the rule. In die next section Locke contrasts ‘conformity’ with ‘disagreement’, saying that it is an action’s 'conformity to or disagreement with some rule that makes them to be...good or ted* (E il.xxviii.15, 359, my emphasis; cf. E II.xxviii.4, 350). The contrast with ‘disagreement’ is ‘agreement’, but here Locke uses ‘conformity’ instead. So here again Locke uses
55
relation described in E IV.i.7 as ‘actual real existence agreeing to any idea’ can be taken as an expression of the second requirement for real knowledge; Locke is saying that we have knowledge of real existence when our ideas conform to an actual external object in the world.
There are good reasons, then, for taking knowledge of existence to include a relation between the relevant ideas and an external object. Further, the second requirement for knowledge of existence is general. For in E IV.i.7, when Locke describes the relation included in knowledge of existence as ‘actual real existence agreeing to any idea’, he is specifying a requirement for knowledge of existence that applies to all three kinds of knowledge of existence (rather than applying uniquely to sensitive knowledge). So while Wilson was light to see Locke having an externalist requirement for sensitive knowledge, he was wrong to limit that externalist requirement to only sensitive knowledge; for both intuitive knowledge of our own existence and demonstrative knowledge of God’s existence include a conformity relation between the relevant ideas and the actual existence of the external object.
It is not yet clear, however, what Locke means by ‘conformity'’. Intuitively, we might take ‘conformity’ to mean ‘resemblance’. But, on Locke’s view, ideas can conform to an external object without resembling the external object (E II.xxx.2, 372-73). A simple idea of a secondary quality does not resemble a quality in an external object, but the idea does represent an actual power in the external object (namely, the power to produce that idea). The ‘reality’ of simple ideas lies ‘in that steady correspondence’ they have to the actual qualities of external objects (whether those ideas correspond to a quality that
‘agreement' and ‘conformity' interchangeably. He does the same thing in his discussion of real knowledge. Locke says that in real knowledge “there is a conformity between our ideas and reality of things”, and then follows this comment by saying that there are “two sorts of ideas that we may be assured agree with things" (E IV,iv.3, 563, my emphasis). So Locke here uses “conformity” and “agree” interchangeably to describe the same relation.
56
p
resembles the idea, or the ideas correspond to a power to cause the idea). We have reason to believe that simple ideas ‘conform’ to an external object, not because the ideas resemble the external object, but because there is a necessary connection between the sensation of a simple idea and the (power of an) external object.
Locke holds that there is a necessary connection between simple ideas of sensation and an external object causing that sensation. He argues, for example, that ‘since the mind...can by no means make to itself’ simple ideas, these ideas ‘must necessarily be the product of [external] things operating on the mind’ (E IV.iv.4, 563-64; cf. II.xxx.2, 373). The sensation of a simple idea must be caused by an external object. ‘From whence it follows that simple ideas are not fictions of our fancies’, but are real ideas that conform to ‘things without us’. So the reason he thinks that our simple ideas conform to reality is that, in his view, there is a necessary connection between the idea and an external material object. Similarly, he argues that in sensation the ideas of objects ‘force themselves upon me, and I cannot avoid having them. And therefore it must needs be some exterior cause, and...some objects without me, ...that produces those ideas in my mind’ (E lV.xi.5, 632, my emphasis). The idea of an object given in sensation thus has a necessary connection to an actual external material object. So, for the same reason that sensation of a simple idea counts as a real idea (namely, its necessary connection to an external object), the idea of an object taken from experience and sensible observation counts as a real idea (cf. E IV.iv.12, 568- 569). it appears, then, that a necessary connection between an idea and an external object is a sufficient condition for making that idea conform to reality, and thus capable of providing us with real knowledge.
The necessary connection between simple ideas of sensation and external objects also holds for ideas of reflection and a thinking substance. Speaking of both ‘simple ideas, conveyed in by the senses’ and of ideas from ‘reflection on [the mind’s] own operations’, Locke says, ‘Because...not imagining how these ideas can subsist by themselves, we...suppose some substratum, wherein they do subsist, and...which therefore we call substance'
57
(E ILxxiii.l, 295; cf. E Il.xxiii.5, 297-98). Locke’s ontology prohibits the existence of bare powers unsupported by a substance. So if we have the sensation of an object, there must be a power external to us that is causing that sensation, and that power must subsist in a substance. Similarly, if we have an idea of the mind acting, there must be a power to perceive that idea, and this power must subsist in a substance. The connection here is between an idea and an actual thinking substance. From his ontology, then, it appears to follow that there is a necessary connection between tire idea we have of ourselves thinking and our actual existence.
Further, Locke also takes there to be a necessary connection between the ideas of reflection and God’s existence. In knowledge of God’s existence we perceive a ‘necessary agreement and connexion’ between the ‘idea of thinking’ and ‘the idea of the existence of an external, thinking Being’ (W4: 60). The perception of the idea of ourselves thinking entails that we actually exist, since there is a necessary connection between this idea and our actual existence. Further, via the cosmological argument, Locke holds that our actual existence is necessarily dependent on God’s actual existence. It follows that there is a necessary' connection between the idea of thinking and God’s actual existence.
The above discussion provides textual evidence for the Dual Relation View in two important ways. First, in each case of knowledge of existence there exists a necessary connection between the relevant ideas and the external object. This is desirable for an interpretation since Locke implies that the real- existence relation, which is a relation between an idea and an external object, is included in all three kinds of knowledge of existence. Second, above we saw that a necessary connection between an idea and an external object is sufficient to make that idea ‘conform’ to reality, and thus capable of providing us with real knowledge. Real knowledge also requires a conformity to reality. So there is good reason to think that, in addition to the perception of a relation between the relevant ideas, the necessary connection between those ideas and the actual existence of the
58
external object are sufficient for real knowledge that the object exists.
It is this necessary connection between our ideas and reality that helps explain why, on Locke’s view, the perception of a relation between ideas can secure knowledge of existence. For example, in knowledge of our own existence, the idea of ourselves thinking is necessarily connected to our actually thinking, and our actually thinking is necessarily connected to our actually existing. So it necessarily follows from the perception of the relation between the idea of ourselves thinking and the idea of our actual existence that we actually exist.13 It is because the perception of these ideas necessarily entails our actual existence, I suggest, that Locke thinks the perception of these Ideas gives us real knowledge of our actual existence. A similar explanation can be given for knowledge of our God’s existence, except that the idea of ourselves thinking is necessarily connected to God’s actual existence; and given the necessary connection sensation has to an external object, the perception of the relation between the sensation and another idea14 can give us knowledge of the existence of material objects.
13 Stillingfleet objected that Locke could not prove that ‘spiritual substance’ exists (W4: 32). Locke replies, ‘I think it may be proved from my principles, and I think I have done it’. He then gives a recapitulation of a proof that seems to be his account of how we know that we exist:
First, we experiment in ourselves thinking. The idea of tins action or mode of thinking is inconsistent with the idea of self-subsistence, and therefore has a necessary connexion with a support or subject of inhesion: the idea of that support is what we call substance; and so from thinking experimented in us, we have proof of a thinking substance in us... (W4: 32-33, my emphasis)
1 suggest that an underlying assumption in this passage is that we perceive a necessary connection between the idea of ourselves thinking and die idea of our existence; the claim that the idea of thinking is inconsistent with the idea of self- subsistence is a different description of this necessary eoimection. On this interpretation, the two ideas that give us knowledge that we exist are the idea of ourselves thinking and the idea of our own existence.
14 In many passages Locke asserts that knowledge that material objects exists depends on current sense perception of that object (e.g,, E IV,in.5, 539; IV.xi.l, 630; lV.xi.9, 635; and IV.xi.l3, 638). Yet Locke elsewhere identifies ‘the two ideas’ we
59
In generai, real knowledge of existence has the following form: we perceive a relation between ideas and these ideas have a necessary connection to the actual existence of an external object; so the perception of the relation between these ideas necessarily entails the actual existence of an external object. Since the perception of the relation between these ideas entails that the external object exists, Locke might reasonably claim that the perception of the relation between these ideas gives us knowledge that the external object actually exists.
The Dual Relation View marks a significant advance over Newman’s Dual Cognitive Model and Wilson’s interpretation. As we saw above, both these interpretations are specific to sensitive knowledge, and the additional requirement (beyond the perception of a relation between ideas) is said to make sensitive knowledge less certain than intuitive and demonstrative knowledge. But for this very reason these interpretations cannot explain how, in general, we have knowledge of existence, which includes intuitive knowledge that we exist and demonstrative knowledge that God exists. By contrast, on my interpretation the further requirement for real knowledge that an object exists is that (in addition to the perception of a relation between the relevant ideas) there be a necessary connection between those ideas and the actual existence of the external object, thus guaranteeing that the ideas ‘conform’ to reality in such a way as to give us real
perceive to agree in sensitive knowledge as ‘the idea of actual sensation (which is an action whereof I have a clear and distinct idea) and the idea of actual existence’ (W4: 360. my emphasis). The ‘idea of actual sensation’ is the idea of the mind having a sensation, as indicated by the parenthetical remark that the sensation 'is an action’ (rather than the representation of an object). For attempts to fit Locke’s account of sensitive knowledge into his beiween-ideas conception of knowledge, see Newman 2004 and 2007, Allen 20)3, Rockwood 2013, and Nagel 2016. For dissenting views see, for example, Gibson 1917, 166; Aaron 1971, 240; Pappas 1998, 288; and Jolley 1999, 187.
The important point for the purposes of this paper is that sensitive knowledge (somehow) results from sensation, and Locke might reasonably take sense perception of art object (along with the perception of its relation to another idea) to be the source of knowledge of material objects since, on his view, the perception of this sensation (and its relation to another idea) entails that the actual existence of the external object causing that sensation.
60
knowledge. Satisfying this second requirement does not make an item less certain. For it is because of this second requirement that Locke thinks that we can be certain, from the perception of our ideas, that the object actually exists. For this reason the Dual Relation View can, but these other interpretations cannot, explain how we acq uire all three kinds of knowledge of existence.
In this section I have argued that there is good textual evidence that Locke holds the Dual Relation View, First, his definition of knowledge entails that knowledge of existence include the perception of a relation between ideas (and he identifies the two ideas in each case); second, his description of the real-existence relation and his account of real knowledge imply that the second condition for knowledge of existence is a connection between the relevant ideas and the actual existence of the external object. I have suggested that a necessary connection satisfies this second requirement. Beyond the direct textual evidence, one virtue of this interpretation is that it explains why Locke thinks that the perception of a relation between ideas can give us knowledge that an external object exists. It is because the relevant ideas are necessarily connected to reality that he thinks that the perception of these ideas can give us knowledge of objects in the actual world. Finally, an interpretive advantage that the Dual Relation View has over competing interpretations is that it can extend to all three kinds of knowledge of existence, whereas these competing interpretations cannot. I take it, then, that there are good reasons for attributing the Dual Relation View to Locke.
§5. Objections and Replies
One worry about the Dual relation View is that it cannot explain why sensitive knowledge is less certain than other forms of knowledge. Newman and Wilson both appeal to the further requirement for sensitive knowledge to explain why it is less certain. However, since on the Dual Relation View all three kinds of knowledge of existence satisfy the second requirement for real knowledge, this second requirement cannot he what explains why- sensitive knowledge is less certain, This leaves me with a need, then, to explain why Locke takes sensitive knowledge to he less
61
certain. For an inability to provide such an explanation might be taken as evidence that sensitive knowledge does not share the same general structure as other instances of knowledge of existence.
Newman takes the degrees of certainty to be determined by ‘the relative likelihood of error’ (Newman 2007, 324). Intuitive knowledge ‘infallibly determines the understanding’ (E IV.xv.5, 656) and ‘there is no room for any the least mistake or doubt’ (E IV.xvii.15, 684). In knowledge from demonstration, however, ‘the danger of the mistake is greater’ (E IV.xvii.15, 684). For example, when we do each step of a mathematical proof correctly we have certain knowledge of the conclusion. But we are fallible, and so we may make a mistake in one or more steps of the proof, in which case the mathematical demonstration does not succeed in giving us knowledge of the conclusion (cf. E IV.xvii.15, 684). On this interpretation, if the likelihood of making an error is greater in sensitive knowledge than in demonstrative knowledge, then sensitive knowledge is less certain. While Newman takes the inclusion of a probable judgment to explain why sensitive knowledge is more likely to err than demonstration, there may be another explanation consistent with the Dual Relation View.
The unique feature of sensitive knowledge is that it depends on having a current sensation. We can know that a particular man exists, for example, when and only when we are currently perceiving him (E IV.xi.9, 635). So one of the two perceived ideas in sensitive knowledge must be the sensation of the object. Locke seems to identify the other idea as the idea of having a sensation (he., an idea of reflection, or our noticing that we are having a sensation).13 On this interpretation, we have sensitive knowledge when we have the sensation of an object (one idea) and wre perceive that we are having a sensation (the second idea). Yet on Locke’s account noticing the operations of our minds, such as perceiving that we are having a sensation, requires that we turn our minds inward. For ‘unless he turns his thought’
1 See footnote 14,
62
inward to the operations of the mind, ‘and considers them attentively’, then ‘he will have but a confused idea’ of those operations (E II.i.7, 107). Inattention, then, will prevent us from noticing that we are having a sensation. Yet ‘be that contemplates the operations of his mind, cannot but have plain and clear ideas of them’ (E II.i.7, 107). So, if we are paying sufficient attention, ‘When we see, hear, smell, taste, feel, meditate, or will any thing, we know that we do so’ (E II.xxvii.9, 335). From this we can see that the connection between ideas in sensitive knowledge is there, but it can be easily missed if we are not paying sufficient attention.
The fact that we may not notice the operations of our minds opens up the possibility for error in sensitive knowledge. For to have sensitive knowledge, on this interpretation, requires identifying a sensation as a sensation. This can go wrong in two ways: we can fail to identify an idea as an idea of sensation, and we can mistakenly identify an idea as a sensation when it is not. If the likelihood of making these types of errors is greater than making errors in a demonstration then, given Newman’s interpretation of the degrees of certainty, sensitive knowledge would be less certain than demonstrative knowledge. Further, this explanation is consistent with the Dual Relation View. On this view, any actual sensation is necessarily caused by an external object. But we might be wrong that this particular idea is caused by an external object, and such a case we would fail to have sensitive knowledge.
The worry under consideration is that since on the Dual Relation View all three kinds of knowledge of existence satisfy the second requirement for real knowledge, there would be no explanation available to the Dual Relation View for explaining why sensitive knowledge is less certain than other forms of knowledge. But I have shown that there is at least one such explanation (consistent with Newman’s own interpretation of the degrees of certainty), and there may be others. It is simply not the case, then, that the Dual Relation View is unable to explain why sensitive knowledge is less certain than other forms of knowledge.
63
There is a second, related objection to the Dual Relation View. If there is a necessary connection between sensation and the external object causing that sensation, that seems to leave little room for perceptual error. But Locke surely would have recognized the possibility of perceptual error (Lolordo 2008, 707-8). Hence, goes the objection, Locke cannot have seriously thought that there is a necessary connection between sensation and an external object. Surely he would recognize that sensation is, at best, reliably (but not infallibly) connected to reality. On the interpretation just presented, however, there is a possibility of error consistent with the Dual Relation View. Specifically, if we are not paying attention to the operations of our minds we may wrongly identify an idea as a sensation when it is not, and thus take ourselves to have sensitive knowledge when we do not. Suppose, for example, we perceive an object, but it is merely a hallucination. If we take the idea of this object to be a sensation then we might think we have sensitive knowledge when we do not. The Dual Relation view, then, is consistent with our sometimes getting things wrong concerning the existence of external objects.
Another objection to the Dual Relation View is that we cannot ever know that the second requirement for knowledge of existence is satisfied. The second requirement is that there be a conformity relation between an idea and an external object. Since we cannot directly perceive an external object (only the idea of the object),16 we cannot perceive the conformity relation between an idea and an external object. Thus we cannot know that the second requirement for real knowledge of existence is satisfied. But if we cannot know that the second requirement for knowledge of existence is satisfied, goes the objection, then we cannot know that the external object exists.
However, the Dual relation View does not require that we know that we satisfy the second requirement for real knowledge. Requiring that we know that we satisfy the second requirement
16 Sec B Li.8, 47; IV.i.I, 525; and iV.xxi.4, 720-721.
64
for real knowledge would amount to a third requirement for real knowledge, and there is no textual evidence that Locke accepts this third requirement. This makes the second requirement for knowledge a kind of ‘externalist’ requirement for knowledge. On an externalist view, we do not need to have justification that we satisfy the requirements for knowledge, nor do we even need to be aware that we satisfy those requirements, in order to have knowledge; merely satisfying the requirements is enough for knowledge. The second requirement for knowledge of existence is an externalist requirement of this sort.
Consider, for example, Alvin Goldman’s causal theory of knowledge. On this view we have knowledge that the table we see exists if there is a causal chain that starts with the table causing our sensation of it and ending with our belief that there is a table (Goldman 1967). We do not need to know that this causal chain obtains in order to know that the table exists; simply satisfying the requirement that there is such a causal chain (whether we are aware of this fact or not) is enough for us to have knowledge that the table exists. We might go on to discuss what justification we have or arguments we can give for the claim that the table causes our sensation, but it is not necessary for knowledge that the table exists that we go on to do so. in a similar way, on Locke’s view we do not have to know that our ideas conform to reality in order to meet the requirements for knowledge of existence, and thus have knowledge that an external object exists. Locke can and does give reasons for why we should think that our ideas conform to reality (see section §4 above), but this discussion is above and beyond what is required for knowledge that an external object exists. So, contrary to the objection under consideration, on Locke’s view we can have knowledge that an external object exists without knowing that the second requirement for real knowledge is satisfied.
Some may find the Dual Relation View unattractive precisely because we cannot know that the second condition is satisfied. However, consider Locke’s view without the second requirement for knowledge of existence. If we eliminate the second requirement for knowledge of existence, then we are left with the
Ideas-Only View which takes the one and only one requirement for knowledge of existence to be the perception of a relation between ideas. But it seems possible for us to perceive the relation between the relevant ideas without the object actually existing. In this case we would satisfy the requirements for knowledge of existence, and so 'know’ that the external object exists, even when the external object does not actually exist! This is seriously problematic. Knowledge that an external object exists should depend on the actual existence of that object. Moreover, the only relation in knowledge as such, on this view, is the relation between the ideas. So even if the object did happen to exist, on the Ideas-Only View the knowledge that the object exists, as such, bears no relation to the actual existence of the object So failing to include the second requirement for knowledge of existence would make Locke’s view more problematic. By contrast, if we include the second requirement for know ledge of existence then it is impossible to ‘know’ that an external object exists when it does not actually exist, since the second requirement is a necessary connection between the idea and the actual external object. From a philosophical point of view-, then, Locke’s view* appears to be more plausible with the second requirement for knowledge of existence than without it.
The primary1 aim of this paper has been to argue that Locke holds the Dual Relation View. That is, Locke holds that knowledge of existence is a kind of real knowledge that includes both the perception of a relation between ideas and a conformity relation between those ideas and reality. I have also argued that he takes there to be a necessary connection between the relevant ideas and the actual existence of an external object, and that this necessary connection is sufficient for the ideas to ‘conform’ (in Locke’s sense) to reality. This necessary connection then explains why he thinks that that the perception of a relation between the relevant ideas gives us knowledge that the external object actually exists. For when we perceive the relation between these ideas, the corresponding external object must actually exist.
So will the Dual Relation View 1 am attributing to Locke satisfy the skeptic about the external world? Certainly not. The
66
skeptic will deny, for example, that there is a necessary connection between the sensation of an object and the actual existence of that object. However, my goal has not been to satisfy the skeptic. Instead, my goal has been to show why Locke thinks that his account can explain how wc have knowledge of the existence of external objects. The reason he thinks we can know that external objects exists by perceiving relations between ideas, I have argued, is that the perception of the relevant ideas necessarily entails that the external object exists. This account satisfies Locke’s definition of knowledge as the perception of a relation between ideas yet, at least on his own terms, is connected to reality in such a way that can explain how we know that an external object actually exists.17
Virginia Tech
171 owe many thanks to Samuel Rickless for comments on previous drafts of this paper. I also thank Steve Lookner, Lex Newman, Donald Rutherford, Greg Taylor, and Eric Watkins, for their comments, as well as my audiences at Brigham Young University, the UCSD History of Philosophy Roundtable, and the Berkelev-Stanford- Davis Graduate Conference.
References
Aaron, Richard I. John Locke, 3rd ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1971.
Allen, Keith. ‘Locke and Sensitive Knowledge’, Journal of the History■' of Philosophy 51, 2 (2013): 249-66.
Ayers, Michael. Locke: Epistemology and Ontology. 2 vols. London: Routledge, 1991.
Bolton, Martha Brandt. ‘Locke on the Semantic and Epistemic Roles of Simple Ideas of Sensation’, Pacific Philosophical Quarterly 85, 3 (2004): 301-21.
Gibson, James. Locke’s Theory of Knowledge and its Historical Relations. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1917.
Goldman, Alvin 1. ‘A Causal Theory of Knowing’, The Journal of Philosophy 64, 12 (1967): 357 72,
67
Jolley. Nicholas. Locke: His Philosophical Thought. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 1999,
Locke, John. An Essay Concerning Human Understanding, cd, Peter H Nidditch. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1975. [abbreviation: E]
Locke. John. The Works of John Locke in ten volumes. London: Rivington, 1824, vol. 4, [abbreviation: W4]
Lolordo, Antonia. ‘Locke’s Problem Concerning Perceptual Error’, Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 77, 3 (2008): 705-24.
Nagel. Jennifer. ‘Sensitive Knowledge: Locke on Skepticism and Sensation'. A Companion to Locke, ed. Matthew Stuart. Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 2016,313-33.
Newman, Lex (2004), ‘Locke on Sensitive Knowledge and the Veil of Perception—Four Misconceptions’, Pacific Philosophical Quarterly 85, 3 (2004): 273-300.
Newman, Lex. ‘Locke on Knowledge’. In The Cambridge Companion to Locke's "Essay Concerning Human Understanding”, ed. Lex Newman Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007, 313-51.
Owen. David. ‘Locke on Sensitive Knowledge’. Unpublished paper, 2008, available at David Owen’s papers:
http: .7www.ie-arirona.edu/ic/dwo/David%27s%20Papers/papersind.htm
Pappas, George. ‘Epistemology in the Empiricists’, History of Philosophy Quarterly 15,3 (1998): 285-302.
Rock wood, Nathan. ‘Is Sensitive Knowledge “Knowledge’?’ Locke Studies 13 (2013): 15-31.
Soles, David E. ‘Locke’s Empiricism and the Postulation of Unobservables’, Journal of the History of Philosophy 23, 3 (1985): 339-69.
Wilson, Aaron, ‘Locke’s Extemalism about ‘Sensitive Knowledge”, British Journal of the History of Philosophy 22, 3 (2014): 425—45.
68
PHYSICA IN JOHN LOCKE’S ADVERSARIA AND CLASSIFICATIONS OF THE BRANCHES OF KNOWLEDGE1
Giuliana di Biase
Abstract
The framework of the various schemes of Physic a in Locke’s classifications of knowledge (ca. 1670-1687) shows relevant traces of what may be defined, in a very broad sense, as an Aristotelian model: the internal divisions of this science are shaped into the classical ordering of the Stagirite’s physical works, as was common in seventeenth-century Aristotelian texts on natural philosophy. However, Locke’s schemes are also evidence of his uneasiness with that model, especially with reference to the first part—the one containing the fundamentals of physics, or physica gerteralis—and the last, concerning the objects of sense- one of the branches of physica speciaiis. This uneasiness was clearly due to Locke’s adherence to mechanism (in particular to Boyle’s mechanism) as well as to his empiricism. The last scheme of Physica (ca. 1687) shows Locke’s detachment from the Aristotelian model and his adhesion to Pansophism: the object of physica generalise which in the earlier schemes was circumscribed to the material world, is re-conceptualised in broader terms which include spiritual beings. This later scheme is also evidence of a redefinition of Physica as a theoretical science, a point which was somewhat obscured in Locke’s previous schemes by the location of the discipline after the practical sciences. The various adversaria Locke wrote in 1677 help to illuminate his way of conceiving the object and scope of Physica; they show the relevance he attributed to the Baconian method of natural history, as well as the priority he assigned to useful knowledge with respect to speculative knowledge.
§1. Introduction
Locke’s classifications of the branches of knowledge represent an important source of information about his theological, metaphysical, political, moral and scientific views and their development throughout time—and not only this. They illustrate how Locke conceived the world he lived in, his changing
1 I would like to thank the reviewers of both this article and a previous one, ‘Theologia, Ethics anti Natural Law in Locke's Classifications of Knowledge and Adversaria*, which appeared in Locke Studies 14 (2014): 177-237. Their precious comments and insights helped me to penetrate the world of Locke’s classifications.
69
attitudes towards the increasing complexity of the mundus mteiUgihiiis and the strategies he adopted to deal with it, A moderate openness towards novelties, balancing conservatism with a total rejection of past legacies, is the peculiarity of Locke’s classifications: the Aristotelian Scholastic worldview, which he had deeply absorbed through his studies at Christ Church, Oxford, is only partially overcome, in the attempt to preserve an equilibrium (a quest for an intellectual via media or mediocritas, the measure which Locke prescribed to the human intellect in the Essay).
The schemes of Politia and Prudentia, the practical sciences, are those which illustrate Locke’s conservatism most plainly: their Scholastic content remains almost unaltered in the various classifications/ which is symptomatic of his considering that tradition as insuperable in this regard. As for the schemes of Theologia, die strong influence of puritanism which becomes visible from 1681 does not alter the Scholastic framework of the discipline overall, whereas the exclusion of Metaphysica from the last classification (c. 1687) shows the distance Locke had progressively taken from some aspects of that tradition. The introduction of two new disciplines, Historia and Semiotica, in the classification of 1681 is evidence of his awareness of the growing complexity of knowledge in his time; the grouping of all the disciplines into two branches in the last classification highlights a different purpose, to reconcile this complexity in a superior unity (a pansophic ideal reminiscent of the Scholastic unitas scientiae).
The schemes of Physica better illustrate the complex dialectic of conservativism and openess towards novelties. They clearly show the influence of the Aristotelian tradition, both in their way of conceiving the internal divisions of the science and in the terminology adopted. Locke’s physics was based on empiricist epistemology; the rise of empiricism was deeply influenced by
- See G. Di Bias«, ‘The Development of the Concept of Prudentia in Locke’s Classification of Knowledge’, Society and Politics 7,2 (2013): 85-125.
70
Aristotelianism, The basic interests of British empiricists such as Francis Bacon, William Harvey, Thomas Hobbes, Robert Boyle and Locke himself (the problem of the sources of knowledge, the problem of method and nominalism) illustrate their debts to British Aristotelians, whose peculiar preoccupation was the paramount role attributed to sensation and induction in the context of an attempt to elaborate a method for scientific knowledge. Also those natural philosophers, such as Bacon, who were not favourable to Aristotle in their search for a scientific method, upon closer examination show their debt to Aristotelians such as Kenelm Digby, Edward Brerewood and Robert Sanderson.3
Numerous Aristotelians were active in Oxford, where Locke spent the years of his early intellectual formation, Aristotelianism was professed by logicians and philosophers, as well as by physicians such as Harvey. The tantalizing contrast between the old and the new—the academic Aristotelian Scholastic orthodoxy of the schools and the unofficial new philosophy of the ‘Invisible college’—was particularly apparent in Oxford in the second half of the seventeenth century: the new conception of matter, space and time characteristic of the new philosophy was markedly anti- Aristotelian. Nonetheless, as Seth Ward shrewdly observed in his Vindiciae Academiarum (1654), the universality of the problems raised by Aristotle, as well as the concision of his methods, rendered his philosophy pervasive in university courses even though its truth or infallibility was no longer to be assumed.4
Aristotelian philosophy formed the core of education in Oxford and in all English universities and colleges throughout the seventeenth century. Aristotle’s philosophy of nature was the model to which almost all the textbooks on natural philosophy
3 See M. Sgarbi, The Aristotelian Tradition and the Rise of British Empiricism (Dordrecht, 2013).
4 S. Ward, Vindiciae Academiarum Containing, Some Briefe Animadversions Upon Mr Websters Book, Sided The Examinations of Academies (Oxford, 1654), 39.
71
conformed.' The most influential ones were those by the Germans Heinrich Aisled. Johannes Combach, Marcus Friedrich Wendelin, Clement Timpler. Johannes Magirus, Christoph Scheibler, Daniel Seimert and Johannes Stier, the French Eustache of St. Paul, the Spanish Rudolph Arriaga and Francis Oviedo, the Dutch Franck Burgersdijck and Gilbert Jacchaeus, the Italians Giulio Pace and Raffaele A versa, the Danzig scholar Bartholomew Keckermann, the Danish Caspar Bartholin, and the Englishmen John Case and Robert Sanderson.11
To label these authors’ works as Aristotelian is potentially misleading: their knowledge of the Aristotelian tradition was derived, in large part, not from medieval commentators but from fifteenth-century authors such as Giulio Cesare Scaligero, Philip Melanchthon, Jacopo Zabarella and the Spanish and Portuguese Jesuits (Francisco de Toledo, Benedict Pereyra, the Conimbricensian commentators and Francisco Suarez), who were those more frequently cited. Besides, their works showed a considerable receptivity to recent discoveries. References to Copemican theory' were quite common,7 and the framework highlighted the influence of mathematics in the tendency to
' Sec M. Feingold, ‘Aristotle and the English Universities in the Seventeenth Century: a Re-Evaluation’, in European Universities in the Age of Reformation and Counter Reformation, ed. H. Robinson-Hammerstein (Dublin, 1998); W. Costello, The Scholastic Curriculum at Early Seventeenth Century Cambridge (Cambridge, MA, 1958); S. Morison, Harvard College in the Seventeenth Century, volume 1 (Cambridge, MA, 1936); E. G. W. Bill. Education at Christ Church Oxford, 1660-1680 (Oxford, 1988).
6 A detailed description of the peculiarities of these authors’ works on natural philosophy is supplied in P, Reif, ‘The Textbook tradition in Natural Philosophy 1600- 1650’, journal of the History of Ideas 30(1969): 17-32, to which I am deeply indebted.
' A few examples may suffice: in his Enchiridion Physician (1625), Bartholin quoted directly from Copernicus, and in his Collegium Physicum (1637) Burgcsdljk admitted that, with the aid of the tetesenpe, many new stars and comets had been seen in the region beyond the moon, although he continued to uphold the incorruptibility of the heavens. The frequent appearance of supra-lurtary phenomena had raised serious doubts about the reality of the impenetrable crystalline spheres, leading Arriaga to entertain the view that the planets float in empty space in his Cursus Philosophies- (Paris, 1639).
72
arrange subject matter after the fashion of a geometrical treatise, with axioms, corollaries and scholia. Nonetheless, there was a considerable distance between the textbook content and the new approach to nature typical of the new philosophy, which had evolved for the most part outside the universities. What was absent was the Baconian vision and Galileian practice of using knowledge to gain control over the forces of nature. In contrast to the new scientists, Aristotelian textbooks insisted on the wholly speculative character of natural philosophy, whose utility would ultimately consist in its leading to a greater knowledge and love of God; their assertions could be interpreted as the stubborn resistance of an entrenched academic system to the disturbing encroachments of a new approach upon their world, but also as the strenuous defense of a traditional worldview against destabilizing novelties (a concern incremented by the diffusion of libertinism and pyrrhonism).
Seventeenth-century textbooks on natural philosophy were broadly Aristotelian insofar as they subscribed to Aristotle’s theory of nature rather than, for example, to those of the Stoics or Atomists. It was from Aristotle that they took the principal concepts and divisions of the science. In typical Peripatetic fashion, natural philosophy was defined as the speculative science studying the world of changing material things (celestial and terrestrial, animate and inanimate), culminating in the study of man. It was divided into two parts, general and special. Corresponding to Aristotle’s Phvsica, the general part considered the principles and properties common to all natural bodies— matter and form, quantity, quality, place, time and motion. The special part, on the other hand, dealt with the principles and properties of particular kinds of natural bodies. In its contents, it roughly corresponded to the other Aristotelian works on natural science (De coelo, De generatione et corruptions, Meterologica, De anima, Parva naturalia, De partibus animaUum and De generatione animaUum). Such a vast programme made seventeenth-century textbooks on natural philosophy a sort of encyclopedia, containing a variegated body of information: the
73
Ij
beginnings of astronomy, chemistry, meteorology, botany, biology, zoology, physiology, anatomy and psychology were all included. All these different disciplines were considered from a single point of view, that is to say as natural or having an intrinsic principle of change; the aim in both parts—the general and the special—was the same, to attain essential knowledge of natural bodies and their properties, and from these to proceed to the knowledge of species. The difficulties encountered in trying to account for the properties of particular bodies were resolved by recurring to pseudo-explanations such as occult qualities, sympathies, antipathies and the foresight of nature.
No Aristotelian textbooks on natural philosophy were to be found in Locke’s library, which may be indicative of his dissatisfaction with them;s by contrast, numerous works of the exponents of the new philosophy were present, even before his leaving for Holland in 1683.9 Locke had become acquainted with some of their authors during his first years at Oxford. In the late 1650s he actively took part in experimental research on the physiology of respiration with Robert Hooke, Richard Lower and Robert Boyle.!0 His knowledge of chemistry, as well as his
8 The only relevant exception was Semen's Epitome Naturalis Scientiae: Locke possessed the 1656 edition of Semen's Opera omnia in two volumes, which included his Epitome (UL. no. 2617). See note 31, above. As for the other authors above mentioned, Locke possessed a work by Keckermann (Meditatio de insolito el stupendo iiio Terrae-motu, LJL no. 1611), another by Bartholin (De diaphragmate & Jacobaeus de ranis. LIE no. 2!3) and some works by Sanderson not concerning natural philosophy (LJL, nos. 2547,2548,2548a).
9 in 1681, Locke possessed eight works by Boyle (LJL, nos. 413, 414, 438, 439, 444, 462, 465, 469) seven by Bacon (LJL, nos. 162, 164-166, 169, 175,178), several by Johann Rudolph Glauber (LJL, nos. 1254—1270), two by Francis Glisson (UL, nos. 1271 and 1272a), alongside some works by Petrus Severinus (LJL, no. 2633), Sennert, Galileo (ULt no. 1208), van Belmont (LJL, no. 1417), Joachim us Jungius (UL, no. 1593), Descartes (UL, no. 604), Hooke (UL, no. 1488), Henry Power (UL, no. 2380), Thomas Willis (UL, no. 3165a) and Nathaniel Highmore (UL, no, 1451b). See LIL, Appendix L. 269 77; A, Clericuzio, Medtcitta, chimica e fitosojia naturals nella biblioteca di John Locke, in Bibliothecae selectae da Cusano a Leopardi, cd. E. Canone (Florence, 1993), 333 75.
J See K, Dewhurst, John Locke, Physician and Philosopher (London, 1984), 3-32; P. R, Ansiey, John Locke and,Natural Philosophy (Oxford, 2011), 52-58,
74
practice of it, was deeply influenced by Boyle, whom he had met in 1660. In this year Boyle published his first book, New Experiments physico-mechanicall, touching the Spring of the air, and its effects, which owed much to Torricelli’s demonstration of a vacuum in his barometer experiments. Locke’s ‘weather diary’, containing daily recordings of his barometric readings, demonstrated a persistent interest in meteorology sharpened by his intellectual vicinity to Boyle.11 12 The latter was also Locke’s main instructor in the application of Helmontian ideas on iatrochemistry, although he had read widely in the works of van Helmont.
The cooperation between Boyle and Locke was particularly intense when the former published The Origin of Formes and Qualities (1666), in which he rejected the Aristotelian idea of matter as continuous, and of individual forms and qualities as being responsible for the differences among the various objects. Boyle’s text further developed his corpuscular theory, already formulated in the New Experiments and in The Sceptical Chymist (1661). He supported his theory by laboratory tests—in particular colour dilution tests—which he demonstrated to Locke and which Locke repeated. The mass of experimental evidence assembled by Boyle in support of his corpuscular philosophy might have gained Locke’s general acceptance, in spite of the epistemic skepticism concerning the possibility of proving the truth of corpuscularianism he would go on to express in the Essay. A subsequent, unpublished treatise, Elements of Natural Philosophy, seems to reveal Locke’s adhesion to the atomist variant of corpuscularianism, influenced by the reading of Newton’s PrincipiaP
11 Locke's observations, which included the strength and direction of the wind, the atmospheric pressure, the temperature, rainfall, and few general remarks, were later published in Boyle’s posthumous A General History of the Air (London»)692: LJL. no. 460), edited by Locke.
12 Bodl. MS Locke, f. 25, f. 230,
15 Sec Locke, Elements of Natural Philosophy (1698), in The Works of John Locke (9 vols., London, 1824, [12lh edtij.), ii, 413-40. The atomist variant of
75
There can be little doubt Locke was well acquainted with Aristotelian textbooks on natural philosophy, which were often used in university courses in his time in substitution of Aristotle’s original works. Physics was to be read during the third year at Christ Church, as prescribed by the curriculum; Aristotle’s other works on physics and biology were to be read during the fourth year.14 Locke might have read the corpus aristotelicum in its entirety, although his library' lacks many of Aristotle’s works. Nicomachean Ethics, Politics and Rethorics were present, whereas Physics and other works on physics were absent. The presence of a commentary on Aristotle’s writings on biology by the Paduan Agosiinus Nifus compensated for the absence of the original.15
All this reading matter undoubtedly forged Locke’s way of conceiving natural philosophy, its object and scope. The great influence which the Aristotelian-Scholastic tradition exerted on his moral, religious and political thought is a further element to be considered'5 in order to understand why, though siding with the exponents of the new philosophy', Locke continued to employ the Aristotelian terminology of substance and accident in the Essay, which he himself ridiculed.1 Likewise, the distinction between
eorpuseulananisrn. as opposed to the plenist variant, rejected the void and claimed the indivisibility of corpuscles. It must be added that recent scholarship has questioned leek’s authorship of the Elements. See J. R. Milton, ‘Locke and the Elements of Natural Philosophy. Some Problems of Attribution’, Intellectual Histoty Review 22 (2012): 199-219. '
14 See R. S. Woolhouse, Locke: A Biography (Cambridge, 2007), 17.
1 Angus tint Niphi Expositiones in omnes Aristotelis iibros De historia animalium... Departibus animalium...Ac De generations animaiium... (Venice, 1546; LJL, no. 117),
‘6 See the eulogy of Aristotle—‘a knowing Man’—in An Essay concerning Human Understanding, ed. P. H. Nidditch (Oxford, 1975) [henceforth E], I.iv.23, 101, and compare IV.xvij.4, 671, where he is characterized as ‘one of the greatest Men amongst the Anlienis’.
" K Liv.lS, 95: ‘since by those ways [sensation and reflection ], whereby other Ideas are brought into our Minds, this [the idea of substance] is not, We have no such clear Idea at all, and therefore signify nothing by the word Substance, but only an uncertain supposition of we know not what; {/. e. of something whereof we have no particular
76
‘substance’ and ‘real essence’ (two terms which refer to the same tiling in the Essay, the internal constitution of objects and the causal ground of their perceivable properties),18 but also the definition of Physica as a speculative discipline and of scientia as a ‘certain and universal Knowledge’ of the real essences of things and of the necessary connections which flow from them19 reveal a certain respect for the abstract structure of Aristotelian philosophy, and for the general intuitions and insights which that structure embodied. Following in the footsteps of Descartes, Gassendi, Boyle and others, Locke attempted to reinterpret and redeploy the terminology and framework of Aristotelian scientific
theory, adapting it to both the ontology of mechanism and his
20
anti-dogmatic epistemology.
This same attempt is apparent in the schemes of Physica incorporated in Locke’s classifications, where a mechanistic and empiricist view of nature is adapted to an Aristotelian framework. The schemes also reveal Locke’s uneasiness with that model, and his final attempt to dispose of it through a re-conceptualization of the object of physica generalis in pansophic terms and the introduction of a new terminology in physica specialis. Nonetheless, the speculative nature attributed to Physica in Locke’s last scheme and in the Essay (an aspect which was somewhat obscured, in the previous classification, by its location after practical sciences) seems to indicate his difficulty in abandoning the Aristotelian model completely. In the following section, attention will be drawn to Locke’s individual schemes of physics, in order to let their peculiarities emerge clearly; also the
distinct positive) Idea, which we take to be the substratum, or support, of those Ideas we do know’. See also II,xiii.20, 175. The terminology of substance, accident, affection and attribute is almost ubiquitous in the Essay, compare Il.xxi.4, 235, where Locke defines the ‘sensible Qualities’ of sensible things as ‘their very Substances’. 14 15
14 F, TI.xxxl.6, 378—SO; regarding the distinction between real and nominal essence, see m.lii.18, 418-19.
15 E lV.iii.29, 559-60,
"" See M. R. Ayers, Locke: Epistemology and Ontology (London, 1993), 15—16.
PI
*íí
various adversaria he wrote in 1677 will be considered, though they do not represent, properly speaking, classifications and do not contain any schemes of physics. Nonetheless, several references to natural philosophy in the adversaria render them an important source of information on Locke’s way of conceiving the object and scope of the knowledge of nature; the adversaria also shed some light on his schemes of Physica, as we shall see.
§2. Physica, 1670-1687
Locke’s classifications and adversaria are to be found in his notebooks and journals. 21 They contain schemes of various disciplines (Theologia, Politia, Prudentia and Physica in the earliest classification, to which Metaphysica, Historia and Semeiotica were added in later ones). The ‘Division of the Sciences’ on the final pages of the Essay represents the point of arrival of Locke’s previous classifications. It appears to be rather sketchy compared with them; perhaps it had been intended as something to be developed, a project Locke dismissed because of the difficulties he encountered in classifying (which seems to be particularly true with reference to the internal divisions of Physica, as 1 shall attempt to demonstrate).
The first evidence offered by Locke’s classifications is that of a marked interest in systematizing and ordering knowledge, a pervasive feature throughout the seventeenth century. The Baconian grand design of an Instaurado Magna, the ambitious encyclopaedic constructions by Andreae, Alsted, Comenius, Caramuel, Izquierdo, Kircher and even Leibniz’s pansophic
The manuscripts (a microfilmed copy in the first case, for the original is in Houghton Library, Harvard) are to be found in the Bodleian Library: ‘Adversaria 1661’, MS Film 77, ff, 1-2, undated; ‘Sapiemia’, MS Locke c. 28, f. 41, dated 1672; MS Locke f. 15, pp, 110, 119-20, 122-23, undated; MS Locke c. 28, f, 50, dated 19 August 1677; MS Locke C. 28, f. 51, dated 12 November 1677; MS Locke f. 2, pp. 247-52, dated 1677; MS Locke e, 42B, p. 22, dated 1679; ‘Adversaria 1661', p. 25, undated; ‘Adversaria 1661’ back endpaper, undated; ‘Adversaria 1661’, pp, 290-91, dated 1681; MS Locke c. 28, ff. 157-58, undated; MS Locke c, 28, ff. 155-56, undated. The classification on the back endpaper of‘Adversaria 1661’ and that in MS Locke e, 42B, p. 22 do not contain any reference to physics, therefore they will not be considered.
78
characteristica, which concludes the century, appear to be the expression of a communal intent going beyond confessional differences, to highlight the organic order and unity of all sciences and arts intended as a mirror of the cosmic divine order. The massive use of schemes and diagrams in seventeenth-century' syntagma, artes universales, digesta sapientiae, claves doctrinarum and the like was conceived of as a fundamental tool to illustrate the harmonía mundi and the correlated idea of a universal connection and communication between the various sciences (an ideal common both to Mersenne and his adversary Robert Fludd, Descartes and his critics Caramuel and Comenius). The unity and certainty of all human knowledge (the Scholastic metaphysical ideal of a true science of being), was intended as the correlate of the unity and certainty of the divine wisdom and of God’s providential design, manifesting itself both in natural phenomena and in human history,22
Tables and diagrams showed the pervasive recourse to the dichotomic technique typical of Ramistic dialectics (a technique rooted in the tendency to use spatial models to conceive of the mental and extra-mental world),23 The presence of Aristotelian elements, Lullian reminiscences and magical-astronomical symbols akin to those Bruno had introduced in his mnemotecnic writings was also frequent. With the passing of time, schemes and diagrams acquired a predominant role in encyclopaedic writings, becoming their supporting structure. The permanent association between a scheme, an image and a word in Comenius’ pansophic writings was evidence of this development, even though the
23 The bibliography on this topic is immense, therefore 1 only refer to a few pioneering works: W. E. Peuckert, Pansophie. Ein Versucht zar Geschiehte der scbvarzen mid weissen Magic (Stuttgart, 1936): P. Rossi, Clovis universalis, 4rti mnemoniche e lógica combinatoria da tullo a Leihms (Milattn-Napoli, I960); G. H. Turnbull, Hartlib, Duty and Comenius (London, 1968); C. Webster, The Great Instaurarían, Science, Medicine, and Reform, 1626-1660 (London, 1975); C. Vaso I i, L 'enciclopedismo net Seicento (Napoli, 1978).
-J See W, ). Ong, Ramus, Method and the Decay of Dialogue (Cambridge, MA, 1974), 74ff.
79
major encyclopaedias of the beginning of the century, in particular Aisled’s, already showed the basic importance attributed to these tools.
The encyclopaedic ideal of a universalis sapientia was also embraced by those seventeenth-century English scientists engaged in the project to create a universal form of language. This task was enthusiastically taken up by a number of eminent members of the Royal Society including John Wilkins, Robert Boyle, Robert Hooke and Newton, for whom the idea of a universal language was a rational response to the perceived inadequacy of seventeenth-century scientific language.24 They conceived the analysis of nature through its simple elements to be a fundamental prerequisite for the creation of a philosophical language. Constructing a new system of signs meant providing a model or theory of nature, and the model they adopted was essentially taxonomic.
Taxonomy was a method growing out of the Aristotelian tradition. It rested on a philosophical view of nature originally articulated by Aristotle, including the belief that natural phenomena are comprised of essences which manifest themselves through the genera and species of things. Clearly, essentialism was incompatible with mechanistic philosophy: the language of the latter was mathematics, not taxonomy. Nonetheless, both mathematics and taxonomy could be perceived as images of order—both were attempts to represent the system and order of nature/' This explains why, in spite of his rejection of the more mystical Aristotelian notions of form, Bacon’s scientific philosophizing continually took the form of taxonomy, and why both Descartes and Newton attempted to elaborate philosophical language schemes.
See M. Slaughter, Universal Languages and Scientific Taxonomy in the Seventeenth Century (Cambridge, 1982).
Regarding the universal search for order which characterized seventeenth century sci ence, see M. Foucaul t, The Order of Things: An Archaeology of the Human Sciences (London, 1970), 7IfF,
80
With respect to encyclopedic and taxonomic schemes, Locke’s classifications appear to express a more modest intention. He neither attempted to introduce a new philosophical terminology nor to devise complicated dichotomous structures capable of illustrating all knowledge in detail or showing its organic unity. More simply, the various branches of knowledge were disposed in Locke’s classifications in parallel vertical columns, with their names being used as headings to which a series of topics, distinguished in subheadings and subordinated items, were appended. The different disciplines were linked together by a few cross-references formulated through verbal clauses, without employing any marks or symbols. This simplicity was evidence of a personal, perhaps pedagogically-oriented need for order, rather than the intention to engage in scientific enterprise. ‘A great help to the memory and means to avoid confusion in our thoughts [Locke affirmed in a journal note for March 6 1677, entitled ‘Study’] is to draw out and have frequently before us a scheme of those sciences we employ our studies in, a map, as it were, of the mundus intelligibilis’.20 His classifications were probably conceived of in this spirit; that is to say, as maps of studies, not as prospective repositories of all human knowledge.
The schemes of Physica included in the classifications are particularly illuminating in this regard: it would be hard to infer Locke’s great interest in botany, zoology, geography and even in medicine from the few topics present in them. Besides, Physica always occupied the last place, being placed after the practical sciences {Politia and Prudentia). Only in the last classification and in the ‘Division of the Sciences’ at the end of Essay did this location change. The postponing of Physica, a speculative science, to practical sciences was incompatible with Aristotelianism, but was in keeping with the hierarchy of duties (religious; moral; particular obligations linked to one’s personal calling) which Locke introduced in ‘Study’: his intention when
"6 Printed in The Life of John Locke: with Extracts from his Correspondence, Journals and Common-place Books, ed. P. King (2 vols,, London, 1830), i, IPS.
81
penning his classifications was to devise a hierarchy of studies grounded in the demands of Christian duty rather than their relative epistemic status, a disciplinary map subserving the types of study worthy of a Christian philosopher.
The position of Physiea in Locke’s earlier schemes was also symptomatic of the modification the discipline was undergoing in the second half of tire seventeenth century, when a new distinction between experimental and speculative philosophy affirmed itself in the context of the study of nature. The distinction referred to different methods of acquiring knowledge: experiment and observation were the marks of the new philosophy, in contrast with the more speculative approach still prevailing in universities. The mention of several mechanical arts in Locke's schemes is a clue to his desire to echo Bacon’s emphasis upon the empirical dimension of physics.
The internal divisions of the science in Locke’s schemes of Physiea were modelled on the classical ordering of Aristotle’s works on physics. However, upon closer examination, the distance he travelled from the Aristotelian model becomes ever more apparent. The first section of the schemes, containing the fundamentals of the science {physiea generalis, corresponding to Aristotle’s Physiea) was the one which underlined this distance most plainly; but the last section, concerning sense objects (one of the branches of physiea specialis), was no less illuminating in the same regard.
2.1 Scheme 1. Physiea in Bodleian MS Locke Film 77, ff.1-2
The title Locke assigned to his earliest scheme of physics (henceforth Scheme l)}1 was Physiea sive Corporum Scientia. Several seventeenth-century authors—Magirus, Stahl and
Burgesdijick, for instance—defined physics as the science investigating corpora naturalia; the absence of the adjective
" The classification including the scheme is undated, but was probably written around 1670: see J, R_ Milton, ‘The Dating of ‘Adversaria 1.661”, The Locke Newsletter 29 (1998): 105-117.
82
naturalium in the title of Scheme 1 might represent an intentional omission, for it could imply that there were also non-natural, spiritual bodies. Henry More’s theories about the Spirit of Nature (an incorporeal substance extended in space, actuating matter as an emanative cause and representing ‘the Vicarious Power of God’ upon the world),2K were possibly what Locke intended to distance himself from, perhaps because of the criticism which More had addressed to Boyle: in his Divine Dialogues (1668), More rejected a purely mechanical explanation of natural phenomena such as the one offered by Boyle in his Hydrostatical Paradoxes (1666), and resisted any attempt to conciliate mechanism with religion. In his Enchiridion Metaphysician (1671), More cited Boyle’s experiments on hydrostatics as proof of the correctness of his theories; Boyle’s answer to More/9 though full of tact and respect, demolished the latter’s argumentation and demonstrated that the hypothesis of a Spirit of Nature was unnecessary to hydrostatics. The materialistic understanding of nature embraced by Boyle—his ‘mechanical’ philosophy—deprived matter of any purposiveness and characterized all teleology in nature as the consequence of the external design of a non-material agent. His criticism of Aristotle and the Stoics’ notion of nature (as well as of Scholastic natural philosophy)’0 was directed to this same end, the rejection of any
:s Henry More, A Collection of Several} Philosophical Writings of Dr Henry More (London, 1662), 46.
Boyle, An Hydrostatical Discourse occasion’d by some Objections of Dr. Henn’ More (London, 1672). A full account of the controversy between More and Boyle is given in R, A. Greene, ‘Robert Boyle and Henry More on the Spirit of Nature’. Journal of the History of Ideas 23 (1962); 451-74. 30
30 Boyle, A Free Enquiry into the Vulgarly Received Notion of Nature (London, 1685; Boyle was already working on this hook in 1666). Scholasticism, Boyle affirmed in the Enquiry, assumed a universe in which a purposive rationality worked quite apart from God and divine providence, and in which there was no distinction between ‘nature’ and ‘providence*; this might lead to some form of ‘paganizing naturalisin’, which must he overthrown, Boyle's strategy was first to show that the Scholastic conception was not scientifically valid, and then to offer his corpuscular philosophy as a superior alternative.
S3
fe\\ \?S
immanent teleology because of its ascribing to nature creative powers which belonged properly only to God.
Locke's adoption of Boyle’s materialistic understanding of bodies was apparent in Scheme 1 as well as in his subsequent schemes (except Scheme 5, as we shall see, and the ‘Division of the Sciences’). In particular, as shown by Scheme 2 (1672), Locke seemed to attribute a great authority to Boyle in defining and renewing die content of physica generalis, which is symptomatic of his considering him as a radical innovator in relation to Aristotelian physics.
Under the heading Physica sive corporum scientia in Scheme 1 Locke listed nine subheadings, respectively ‘Materia’, ‘Coelestia’, ‘Fossilia’, ‘Vegetabilia’, ‘Animalia’, ‘Homo’, ‘Animay ‘Corpus humanunr and ‘Sensus’. The subheadings roughly corresponded to Aristotle’s works on natural philosophy: ‘Materia1 to Physica; ‘Coelestia’, the four elements grouped under it, and ‘Fossilia’ to De coelo, De generatione et corruptions and Meteorologica. All the other subheadings apart from the last referred to Aristotle’s De anima and to his division of living creatures into plants, animals and human beings (corresponding respectively to anima vegetativa, sensitiva and rationales). ‘Sensus’ corresponded to De sensu et sensibilibus (the first of the Parva naturalia). The order of the various sections was almost the same as in seventeenth-century textbooks on natural philosophy, apart from ‘Sensus’: the manuals usually concluded with a part devoted to the rational soul, in conformity with the Biblical account of creation (man as the last and most perfect of the various species), whereas Locke ended Scheme 1, as well as his subsequent schemes, with a section devoted to sense objects. The order of the subheadings was more respectfi.il of the chronology of Aristotle’s works (the composition of De Anima preceded De Sensu), yet this was not, probably, the reason why he located ‘Sensus’ last of all. The topics listed under this subheading (more numerous than those located under the others), appeared to be closely linked to the empiricism of the two Drafts for the Essay (c, 1671); the peculiar position of ‘Sensus’ in
84
Scheme 1 may therefore reflect the fundamental basis on which he supposed knowledge of nature to repose, i.e. sensation.
Under ‘Materia’ Locke introduced ‘Extensio et Numerus’, ‘Motus’ and ‘Universum’; to extension and number he linked ‘Geometria et Arithmetica’, to motion ‘Mechanica’, ‘Universum’ was linked to ‘Mundus Creatio’. Very little remained of the content of Aristotle’s Physica—there was no mention of forms, qualities, continuum, infinity, place and time. The distance Locke opened from the Aristotelian model becomes more apparent when we compare Scheme 1 with the index of one of the more advanced seventeenth-century manuals on natural philosophy, Sennert’s Epitome naturcilis scientiae, which was in Locke’s
*31'
library.' With reference to physica general is, in his Epitome Sennert listed several of the topics treated in Aristotle’s Physica (‘De natura Physica’, ‘De principiis rerum naturaiium’, ‘De natura et causis’, ‘De continuo et infinite’, ‘De loco’, ‘De tempore’, ‘De motu’). In his Physicae scientiae compendium, published in 1671 but written at least half a century earlier, Robert Sanderson followed more or less the same pattern, adding ‘Vacuum’ among the arguments of the general part. When compared with that of Sennert or Sanderson’s works, the content of physica generalis in Scheme 1 appears to be intentionally deprived of all those features which could represent a reference to the Aristotelian model.
Extension, number and motion corresponded to some of the primary qualities which Locke would attribute to matter in the Essay, the list of qualities would be much more substantial in the 31
31 Locke greatly esteemed Sennert; in a journal note for Feb. 3, 1685, he wrote: ‘Sennertus, whom all agree to be an authority, has collected the best passages from ancient and modern writers, and added his own learned and worthwhile observations. His works cover thoroughly everything of any value on She art of medicine which had been written before his time’ (quoted in Dewhurst, John Locke, 267). Some lengthy notes Locke took from Sennert’s works in 1659 (Bodl. MS Locke f. 18, pp. 28-29. 33, 35-36, 82), especially from his Hypomnemata physica, reveal he was especially interested in his view on generation; he referred to Sennert’s 'principium seminale’ as a cause of spontaneous generation.
85
latter,'" and would not give priority to extension. According to Galileo, extension and its modes (shape and size), situation, motion (or rest) and number were the real, objective qualities of matter or corporeal substance, distinct from apparent qualities such as taste, smell, and so forth;JJ the corporeal domain was limited to the real qualities of matter, which could be described in mathematical terms. Descartes considered only extension to be an essential property of matter; ’4 Walter Charleton took prime matter to be ‘absolutely devoid of all quantity’,35 whilst Hobbes considered extension, quantity, and aptness to receive forma and accidentia as the fundamental attributes of matter.Boyle’s definition of matter in The Origin as a ‘substance extended, divisible, impenetrable’, endowed with motion by God, introduced the notion of impenetrability, which anticipated Locke’s ‘solidity’,'1
The list Locke would give in £, ILviii differs in the various paragraphs; the chapter includes solidity, extension, figure, motion, rest, bulk, number, texture, size and situation. For Locke's treatment of primary qualities, see J. W. Yollon, Locke and the Compass of Human Understanding: A Selective Commentary on the Essay (Cambridge, 1970), 23-2?.
33 G. Galilei, //Saggiatore (Rome-Padua, 2005), 284-85.
M R. Descartes, Principia Phiiosophiae, in Ouevres, ed. C. Adam and P. Tannery (13 vols., Paris, 1897-1913), viii, [i], 25.
W. Charleton, Physiologia Epicuro-Gassendo-Charltoniana (London, 1654), II, i,
1,88.
ífj T. Hobbes, Elemenlorum Phiiosophiae sectio prima. De corpore, viii, 24, in Thomae Hobbes Malmesburiensis Opera Philosophica Quae Latine Scripsit Omnia, ed. Sir W, Molesworth (London, 1839), 105.
" See R, Boyle, The Origin of Formes and Qualities, in The Works of the Honourable Robert Boyle, ed. T. Birch (6 vols., London, 1772), iii, 15. Boyle added posture, order, bulk and texture to the Galilean list of primary qualities, though he considered the first two to be reducible to situation (22); bulk depended on size, whereas texture was a complex quality consisting in the shapes, sizes, and motions of an arrangement of corpuscles. Boyle defined size, shape and motion as (he ‘three essential properties’ of each particle of matter (16), but he seemed also to assign a priority to motion with respect to ‘Bulk, Figure, Rest, Situation, and Texture’, as ‘the Great Agent of all that happens in Nature’ (15). Compare £, H.iv, 122-27; ll.viii.9, 135.
86
To this quality, which was not mentioned in Scheme /, Locke would attribute epistemic priority in the Essay.3* In Draft B,39 he declared the defining characteristics of matter to be extension and cohesion, which he characterized as conceptually and ontologically prior to all the other qualities.40 Impenetrability (as well as the power of receiving and communicating motion) was presented as a consequence of extension and cohesion. Since there was no mention of cohesion in Scheme 1, we may be inclined to assign it to an earlier stage of the development of Locke’s idea of matter. Nevertheless, the great relevance attributed to extension and number in both Drafts suggests a conceptual vicinity with the scheme. In Draft A, extension and number were said to be the ‘2 grande & universal measures of all things’, that is to say those upon which all the others depend and ‘in which we seeme to have the most certeine knowledg’.4 Extension and number where characterized as the basic objects of mathematical reasoning. The ideas of extension, number and ‘perhaps’ also the idea of motion, Locke declared in Draft B, are the ‘most lasting & those which are universally found in the minds of every man’.42 The three qualities listed under ‘Materia’ in Scheme 1 might therefore have been chosen not only because of the relevance which Boyle and other mechanistic philosophers attributed to them more or less unanimously, but also because of the universality and certainty which Locke attributed to the
38 Sec E III.x. 15, 498: 'Matter is but a partial and more confused Conception, it seeming to me to be used for the Substance and Solidity of body, without taking in its Extension and Figure’. On solidity, see E ll.iv, 122-27 and II.viii.9, 135.
39 Locke, Draft B, Drafts for the Essay Concerning Human Understanding ami Other Philosophical Writings, vol.l: Drafts ,4 ami B, ed. P. H. Nidditeh and G. A. J. Rogers (Oxford, 2012), §51, 158.
40 Locke, Draft B, §94, 209.
41 Locke, Draft A, §11, 22.
4" Locke, Draft B, §30, 140, Locke might have not been sure about motion because its perception involved, in his opinion, two or more senses, not just one as in the eases of extension and number.
87
corresponding ideas, intended as the basic ingredients of our empirical knowledge of the world. Other details in Scheme / suggest a close link with the empiricism of the Drafts: the repetition of extension and number under ‘Sensus’, to anticipate, recalls one of the main theses of the Drafts, the empirical origin of mathematical concepts. The relevance which Locke attributed to the ideas of extension, number and motion in the Drafts, as the most certain, universal and easily retained,43 was probably already clear to him when writing Scheme 1.
The mention of geometry and arithmetic under ‘Materia’ conformed to the teachings of mechanistic philosophy, which in accordance with Galileo insisted on the mathematical nature of matter. Arithmetic and geometry were the first two mathematical disciplines of the quadrivium;44 in the remainder of Scheme 1, Locke introduced the other two, ‘Astronomia’45 and ‘Musica’, the first linked to the subheading ‘Coelestia’ and the second to ‘Soni’ (one of the secondaiy qualities of matter listed under “Sensus”).
As for ‘Mechanica’, its identification with the scientia motus (as in John Wallis’s Tractatus de mechanica, published in 1670), was a recent innovation, for mechanics had traditionally been associated with the science of weights, or statics, as it was by
Locke, Draft B, §30, 139-40.
"* The works on mathematics which Locke collected in his library during his life were not numerous: he possessed Euclid’s Elements (LJL, no. 1073), Jacques Peletier’s manual L'arithmétique (LJL, no. 2245a) and Pascal’s Traité du triangle arithmétique (LJL, no. 2224), As for English mathematicians, Locke owned Isaac Barrow’s Worts and Lectiones geometricae (LJL, no. 212 and 212a), Jonas Moore’s Mathematical Compendium (LJL, no. 2036) and in particular Joseph Raphson’s Analysis aequationum universalis (LJL no. 2441), containing a defense of Newton’s theory of absolute space (De spatio reali, LJL no. 2442). 4
4'' Like those on mathematics, works on astronomy are not numerous in Locke’s library: he possessed Galileo’s Opere (LJL, no, 1208, not including the Dialogo sopra i due massimi sistemi), Christian Huygens' Systema Saturnium (LJL, no. 1538a) and Cosmotheoros (LJL, no. 1537: the data in this work, concerning the distance of the solar system from fixed stars, were used by Locke in the third chapter of the Elements). A work by Honoratus Faber devoted to Huygens’s astronomical observations (LJL, no. 979), and other books by Thomas Streete (LJL, no. 2795), Kaspar Knitted (LJL, no, 1645a) and David Gregory (LJL, no, 1313) were also present in his library.
88
Galileo and Descartes.46 Locke recorded both the meanings of mechanica in his scheme: the latter was reintroduced under ‘Sensus’ as the discipline concerning ‘Gravitas’ and ‘pondus’ (weight).
The last topic under ‘Materia’, ‘UniversunT, introduced cosmology, which commonly followed the exposition of the principles of natural bodies in Aristotelian textbooks. In The Origin Boyle had affirmed: ‘we must consider each body not barely, as it is itself, an entire and distinct portion of matter, but as it is a part of the universe, and consequently placed among a great number and variety of other bodies upon which it may act, and by which it may be acted on, in many ways’.4'' In the Essay, Locke would develop the Boylean idea of a inter-dependence of the various bodies in the ‘stupendious Structure of the Universe’48, insisting on their close interlock as affecting the entire scale of nature, from animals to the simplest elements. He believed in a purposive universe, where the close dependencies between objects in nature (the various steps of the chain of being) were evidence of ‘the great Design and infinite Goodness of the Architect’.4J The dependence of the material world on the creative act of this supreme Architect was highlighted in Scheme 1 by the topic linked to ‘UniversunT, ‘Mundus Creatio’. ‘Creatio’ was also the last topic listed under Theologia, the first branch of knowledge in the classification of 1670: physics began where
46 Galileo aimed at a synthesis of statics and dynamics within a new science of mechanics, but he abandoned this project: see P. Galiuzzi, Momenta, Stud's GaUteiam (Rome, 1979), 309 ff.
41 Boyle, The Origin, in Works, iii, 20,
4* E IV.vi.l 1, 587. See also IV.vi, 11.585-87, where Locke gives several examples of the dependencies and relations of bodies upon bodies. 49
49E III.vi.12, 447. Nature lias no gaps, insisted Locke: ‘the Animal and Vegetable Kingdoms, are so nearly join’d, that if you will take the lowest of one, and the highest of the other, there will scarce be perceived any great difference between them; and so on till we come to die lowest and the most inorganical parts of Matter, we shall find every-wherc, that the several Specie« are linked together, and differ but in almost insensible degrees’.
theology ended, as a means of exploring and verifying the divine order of creation.50
Under the second subheading, ‘Coeiestiah Locke listed the four elements, respectively ‘Ignis’, ‘Aer\ ‘Aqua’, and ‘Terrestria’. The couple ‘Coelestia’-‘Terrestria’ was reminiscent of the subdivision between the two realms, heavenly and sublunary, in Aristotelian textbooks on natural philosophy. In subsequent schemes, ‘Terrestria’ would become ‘Terra’, so that the four elements would be more easily recognizable. Devotion to tire tour-elements theory was one of the main characteristics of seventeenth-century textbooks on natural philosophy: faced with the attacks of Lorenzo Valla, Gerolamo Cardano, Bernardino Telesio and Gomez Pereira, their authors reacted by reaffirming that the elements were four, though they no longer thought of them as arranged in concentric separate spheres (Sennert, Burgersdijek and Eustache of St Paul were particularly eloquent in this regard). It might seem strange to see the iatrochemist Locke pay obeisance to the four element theory: Paracelsus had already discarded it in favour of salt, sulphur and mercury, and van Helmont had carried out some important revision as well. By distilling blood, Boyle had recovered more than four elements; probably in 1666 Locke was repeating his experiments, as shown by a note he took in his diary.'1
The presence of the four elements in Scheme 1 is symptomatic of Locke’s conceiving the Aristotelian worldview as a useful tool to order and systematize the contents of natural philosophy. He certainly took seriously the recommendation which Boyle addressed to the new philosophers in The Origin, that they should not become embroiled in the many Scholastic disputes regarding
'y' Regarding creation see Draft A, § 16, 3 i; ‘When the thing is wholly made de novo i.e, not: part there of did ever exist before as when a new particle of matter doth begin to exist in rerum natura which had before noe being and this we cal Creation'. See also Draft B, |I34,254.
J> Dewhurst, John Locke, 2i.
90
the number of the elements.52
‘Aer’ was linked to ‘Meteora’, ‘Aqua’ to ‘Mare’, and ‘Terrestria’ to ‘Geographia Physica’, a subject of great interest to Locke.53 The term ‘meteors’ was still used in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries to indicate transitory atmospheric
phenomena caused by the interaction in the air of terrestrial vapours or exhalations, and consisting of elemental air, fire or water. The theory established by Aristotle in his Meteorologica remained a touchstone in this regard, as shown by the description which John Harris gave of meteors in his Lexicon Technician (1704)54.
As is clearly shown by his last scheme of Physica (1687), Locke used the term fossilia as synonymous with mineralia, as was common in the scientific lexicon of his time (Boyle, to name only one, treated the two terms as equivalents). Between 1665 and 1666 Locke seems to have been particularly interested in mineralogy, an interest he shared not only with Boyle but also with his fellow student David Thomas. His inquiries ‘into the nature of Mineralls’ of 1666 duly obtained Boyle’s approbation.’’ Locke possessed the most important works on mineralogy of his own and the previous century, including Georgius Agricola’s De
52 Boyle, Works, iii, 6.
" The several works on geography collected in Locke’s library suggest a permanent interest in this subject. The library contains both works on geographia generalis (such as those by George Abbot, Ul. no. 2a, Pierre d’Avity. UL no. 157a, Michel Baudrand, LJL no. 224, Philip Brietius, UL no. 4S6, Roger Castlemaine, UL no. 627b, etc.) and several works on geographia apecialis (Christoval Acuna’s Relation on Amazonia, LJL no. 16, Nicholas Denys’s description of North America, UL no. 951, Pierre Belon’s work on the Levant, UL no. 259, etc,). A list of all the works on geography in Locke’s library is given in UL, Appendix V, 298.
54 Of course, several aspects of Aristotle’s meteorological theory were at the same time objects of controversy : see for inst. Boyle, An Examen of Aniiperislasis, in Works, ii, 667, 55
55 See Boyle to Locke, June 2 1666, in The Correspondence of John Locke e& E. S. de Beer (henceforth Cotr.) (8 vols., Oxford, 1976 ), i, 279.
91
iV
re metellm56 In that text the term fossilia was used to refer to ail inorganic bodies, Conrad Gessner, Ulysses Aldrovandus57 and others similarly failed to distinguish between minerals and the mineralized remains of plants and extinct animals, which they named as lapides figurati and regarded as a lusus naturae. A work by John Woodward (a large collection of fossils and minerals) was probably the most effective in establishing the truth concerning fossils;58 however, it was published in 1695, too late to influence Locke’s schemes. His acquaintance with the Danish Nicolas Stensen fs Prodr omits and with Robert Hooke’s Micrographiaboth of which insisted on the organic origin of fossils, may have been the reason for Locke’s hesitating to use the term '‘Fossilia” as synonymous with “Mineralia” in Scheme 5 (1687). His reluctance to introduce new terms, which that same scheme evidences, was, perhaps, another sign of Locke’s focus on linguistic clarity7 and simplicity, a concern expressed explicitly in the Essay.60
56 Agricoia, De re metaiiica libri XL] (Basle, 1657; UL. no. 37). Agricola disliked the distinction between fossils and metals prevalent in his time, which was based on Aristotle’s division of inorganic bodies into orycta and metalleuta (respectively, bodies formed by dry and humid exhalations); he characterized fossils as bodies whose parts were formed either of the same substance (simple fossils) or of different substances which could be reduced to earth, stone or metal (composite fossils). Metals were therefore to be intended as a sub-group of the fossils; since Agricola, the term fossilium assumed the general meaning of inorganic body.
i‘ Locke possessed Gessner’s De omni rerum fossilium genere (Ziirich, 1565; UL, no. 1247); as for Aldrovandus, he possessed several works of his on animals (UL, nos. 53-57), where also minerals and plants were heated.
f: J. Woodward, An Essay towards a Natural History of the Earth, and Terrestrial Bodies, espeeiafy Minerals (London, 1695; UL, no. 3179),
59 N. Steno, Prodromus to a Dissertation concerning Solids naturally contained within Solids (Florence, 1669; the work was translated into English in 1671. See UL, X». 2767); R. Hooke, Micrographia (Ixfndon, 1665; UL, no. 1488).
See E III.vi.51, 471; ‘He that hath new Notions, will, perhaps, venture sometimes on the coining new' Terms to express them; But Men think it a Boldness, and ‘tis uncertain, whether common Use will ever make them pass for currant. But in Communication with others, it is necessary, that we conform the ideas we make the vulgar Words of any language stand for, to their known proper Significations (which 1
92
‘Animalia’, the fourth subheading, is followed by the names of four species, respectively ‘Insecta’, ‘Volatilia’, ‘Gressilia’, and ‘Natantia’. ‘Gressilia’ was the term typically used in Aristotelian translations to denote animals which walk the earth.61 Aristotelian divisions of animals traditionally distinguished between terrestrial and aquatic beasts, though Aristotle himself sometimes seemed to forget or reject this dichotomy/’2 In his Expositiones, Augustinus Nifus followed this traditional partition, further subdividing terrestrial animals into ‘gressilia’, ‘volucres’ and ‘insecta’.6'’ Locke, by contrast, preferred to avoid this dichotomy altogether and to classify animals as aerial, terrestrial and aquatic, as he would do in the Elements64 and in his various schemes: there the
have explain’d at large already,) or else to make known ttaai new Signification, we apply them to’. It is interesting that Locke applied this linguistic criterion also in his schemes which, as some details suggest (in particular the errors regarding the spelling of Greek terms), where probably not intended to be shown to others.
61 The term was also in Gessner’s Historiae Ammalium (Zurich, 1555), which Locke possessed (see LJL, no. 1248, which refers to the edition of 1620). Locke seems to have been particularly interested in insects: his library contained some works on insects by Aldrovandus (LJL no. 54), Thomas Mouffet {LJL, no. 2059) and Jan Swammerdam (LJL, no. 2807). See also the journal note for Sept. 19, 1676, in An Early Draft oft Locke’s Essay, together with Excerpts of his Journals, ed. R, I. Aaron and I, Gibb (Oxford, 1936), 83. See also Elements, 432, where Locke defines insects as 'a great tribe of animals’. In E, II.xxi.55, 270, a nice comparison between men and insects may be found.
62 Sometimes Aristotle introduced the distinction between terrestrial and aquatic animals, as in the History of Animals 1.1.487al4; sometimes he seemed to refuse the (originally Platonic) dichotomy, preferring to divide animals from the outset into more than two classes (as in History of Animals, 1.1. 487b20, where they arc divided into those that walk, crawl, and undulate). See P. Pdlegrin, Aristotle's Classification of Animals: Biology and the Conceptual Unity’ of the Aristotelian Corpus (Berkeley, CA, 1986), 22-28.
i,i A. Nlphus, Expositiones, 4. There were, of course, different kinds of division. In his Physicae scientiae compendium, iv. 4, Sanderson divided animals into Twrestria1 and ‘Aquea’, and Terrestria’ into ‘GressibiJia’ and ‘Velaria’, ‘Gresstbilia’ were further subdivided into ‘Quadrupedia’ and ‘Reptilia’.
wLocke, Elements, 431-32: ‘Brutes may be considered as either aerial, terrestrial, aquatic, or amphibious. 1 call those aerial, which have wings, wherewith they can support themselves in the air. Terrestrial, are those, whose only place of rest is upon the earth. Aquatic, are those, whose constant abode is upon the water. Those are called
93
number of species listed under ‘Animalia’ would become more substantial, but he consistently avoided the traditional dichotomy, which was an instance of the kind of partition he would censure in the Esso)-.'’'
No topic was listed under ‘Vegetabilia’, either in Scheme 1 or in subsequent schemes: only in Scheme 5 would Locke introduce a few topics under this subheading. This might seem strange, given the salient interest in botany which Locke’s herbarium, manuscript notes, journal and correspondence make plain.66 He probably considered the subject too vast to be treated in every particular in his schemes. Locke’s intention, one surmises, was not to focus on the particular but rather on the general, that is to say, on the order of the various divisions of physics and of the corresponding disciplines. That said, it is also possible that the difficulties of which he spoke in the Essay, of finding a suitable criterion for cataloguing plants into species, were already perplexing him at the time he wrote Scheme 1.67
amphibious, which live freely in the air upon the earth, and yet are observed to live long upon the water, as if they were natural inhabitants of that element’.
65 Locke, £ IFLvi.12, 447. Concerning the criteria for ranking animals into species, see 11!.v. i 3, 436; regarding the difficulty of ranking them, which Locke attributed to our ignorance of the real essence of things, see Ill.vi.9, 444-45; ffl-vi. 16,448; IILvi 26- 27, 453-55. See also Draft A, §2, 8-9; Draft B, §76, 183-84 and Locke’s journal note for Nov. 19 1677, printed in An Early Draft, 98-99.
* See P. Anstey and S. A. Harris, ‘Locke and Botany’, Studies in History and Philosophy of Science, Part C: Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences 37 (2006): 151-71. Locke’s library contains the most important botanical works of ancient and modem authors, from Dioscoride (LJL, nos. 973 and 973a) to John Ray (LJL, nos. 2444-48). Renaissance works on botany, such as those by Pietro Andrea Mattioli (LJL, nos. 1939 and 1940) and Bartolomaeus de las Casas (LJL, no, 1680a) are present, though seventeenth-century texts prevail: the botanic catalogues by Jacob Bobart (LJL, no. 360) and Pierre Magnol (LJL, no. 1870), the works on exotic plants by Willem Piso (LJL, nos. 2314 and 2315), jacobus Bontius (LJL, no. 386), Georg Marcgraf (LJL, no. 1900) and Nicolas Gervaise (LJL, no. 1245) arc only some of those which may be found in the library.
'"See E lll.vi.23, 451-52, where he rejected the criterion of propagation as insufficient: ‘if the Species of Animals and Plants are to be distinguished only by propagation, must 1 go to the Indies to see the Sire and Dam of the one, and the Plant
94
No topic appeared under ‘Homo’, the sixth subheading, either in Scheme I or in its sequel. In the scheme written in 1681, Locke would subsume the seventh subheading, ‘Amnia’, under ‘Homo’, so as to render the threefold partition of living creatures (‘Vegetalia’, ‘Animalia’ and ‘Homo’) more easily recognizable. In Scheme 1, ‘Anima’ was followed by three topics, ‘Intellectus, Voluntas et passiones’. Intellect and will corresponded to two of the three Aristotelian faculties of the intellective soul; the third, memory, was not cited in Scheme 1. Reason was usually absent from the list of the mental faculties in late sixteenth-seventeenth century philosophical taxonomies: the faculties cited were the Aristotelian ones. Zabarella followed Aristotle, but noted that other commentators regarded memory as not distinct from the intellect.68 Decartes’s rule seven in his Discourse on method minimized the role of memory. We may suspect that the absence of this faculty in Scheme 1 was due to the latter’s influence, Descartes being mentioned in the Drafts.
Passions were introduced under Pntdentia, the third discipline in the classification of 1670 (‘In passiones suas imperium’); their presence in Scheme 1 is symptomatic of Locke’s medical interest in this subject, nourished by the teachings of his influential masters Thomas Willis and Thomas Sydenham.''9
‘Intellectus’, ‘Voluntas’ and ‘Passiones’ were followed by a gloss: ‘qui pertinere etiam possunt ad Theologiam’. This was a reference to the second subheading under Theologia in the same classification, ‘Anima separata’. The dual link between Physica
from which the Seed was gather’d, that produced tire other, to know whether this be a Tyger or that Tea?’.
68 J. Zabarel la, De rebus natural ¡bus iibri XXX (Treviso, 1604, die tenth ed.), 516.
69 Some notes lent to Locke by Thomas Lower (nodi. MS Locke f, 19, 1-68, passim), regarding Thomas Willis’s Sedleian lectures of late 1661 or early 1662, reported on sudden or violent passions being die cause of nervous distempers, especially in women. Sydenham agreed: see his Epistolary Dissertation (Letter to Dr. Cole. 1681/2), in The Works of Thomas Sydenham (2 vols„ London, 1S50), it, 89 and 96.
95
and Theohgia (the first being introduced by ‘Creatio’) highlighted the subordination of the first to the second, and contributed to creating a sort of hierarchy between the various disciplines. Also their unity was emphasized. Physica depended on Theohgia; Prudentia depended on both Theohgia (with reference to its supreme end, eternal happiness), and Physica (with reference to one of its instrumental ends, health). The priority assigned to Theohgia seemed not, however, to correspond to Locke’s main interests when he was composing his first classification: the topics listed under Physica and Prudentia were far more numerous than those collected under Theohgia. Subsequent classifications (in particular, that of 1681) revealed a balancing of interests, with the topics listed under theology becoming more numerous.
‘Corpus humanum’, the eighth subheading, was followed by 11 Medic ma' and its three branches, ‘Anatomia sive historia partium', ‘Pathologia sive historia affectuum’ and ‘Therapeutica sive historia curationum’. Physiology (closely linked to anatomical research), pathology and therapeutics represented the three fundamental ‘Medical Institutions’ in the seventeenth century, the three branches of medicina theorica,70 The practical side of medicine (Practica) consisted in lists of signs and their corresponding treatments. Locke’s expertise encompassed both theoretical and practical medicine, thanks to his studies and experiences in Oxford. His library contained a few ancient and medieval works on medicine (those by Hippocrates mostly, and some exponents of the school of Salerno);71 with reference to
1 Medical theory (Theorica) received formai definition by the middle of the seventeenth-century. Physiology dealt with the conformation of the human body in health (its ‘natural’ state), pathology was the study of the ‘contra-natural’ state of the human body. Maintenance of health (Hygiene) and eradication of disease (Therapeutica) represented the third institution,
n f or Hippocrates, see UL, no, 1457-1457e; Locke also possessed Honoré Bicais’s Mammie Metlicorum, sett £mo£iç aphorismorum Hypocratis (UL, no. 335), Galen’s works are absent, apart from the seventeenth-century edition of Leonard Fuchs (UL, no. 1198 ay For the school of Salerno, see UL, no. 2533.
96
anatomy, seventeenth-century writings prevailed (those by- Harvey, Richard Lower and Jacques Chaillou on blood circulation, those by Thomas Willis, Marcello Malpighi and Gerolamo Fracassati on the anatomy of the brain, those by George Ent, Thomas Bartholin, Malpighi and Swammerdam on respiration, S tensen’s treatises on muscles and glands, Glisson’s works on the anatomy of liver and of the digestive apparatus, and so on).72
As for pathology and therapeutics, Locke’s library- showed bis clear preference for works oriented towards a practical approach, it contained the most important sixteenth-century treatises (such as those by Andrés de Laguna, Felix Plater, Giovan Battista Cortesio, Wolfgang Gabelkover, Timothy Bright and Michele Gavasseti)73, as well as several seventeenth-century works (by Henricus de Heer, Lazare Rivière, Santorio Santorio, Petrus Lotichius, Henricus Regius and, in particular, Ludovico Settata, to whom Locke devoted special attention).'4 The great number of sixteenth and seventeenth century works devoted to practical medicine in Locke’s library was evidence not only of his interest in this field (deepened by his medical apprenticeship alongside Sydenham in the years 1667-1670), but also of the progressive
72 LJL. nos. 1397—1398 (Harvey); 1815 (Lower); 653a (Chaillou); 3165a (Willis); 1888 and 1889 (correspondence between Malpighi and Fracassati on the anatomy of the brain); 1053 (Ent); 215 (Bartholin); 1884 (Malpighi); 2808 (Swammerdam); 2764- 2766a (Stensen); 1272a and 1272b (Glisson), Between 1666 and 1667, Locke composed a treatise entitled Respiratioms tisus (see J. C. Waltnsiey, John Locke jt natural philosophy 1632-1671, Doctoral Dissert., King’s College London, 1998, 262 271); in 1668 he penned a short medical essay entitled ‘Anatomia’ (277-90). Thomas Willis, Locke’s teacher at Oxford, was the author of the Cerebri Anatome (1664); among Locke’s colleagues at Christ Church, Hooke and Lower were expert anatomists. Locke occasionally planned, and probably also helped to carry out, experiments on animals (see Bodl. MS Locke f. 19, f. 338).
nUL, nos. 165 lb-165 id (Laguna); 2331 - 2331a (Plater); S34 (Cortesio); 1203 (Gabelkover); 487a-488 (Bright); 1222-1222h (Gavasseti). 74 *
74 Ul, nos, 1407-1407« (de Heer); 2486-2487 (Rivière); 2546 (Santerías); 1810
(Lotichius); 2460a (Regius); 2618-2619 (Septalius; Locke took some notes from bis work in 1678, found in Bodl. MS Locke c. 33, ff. 3-4).
97
overcoming, at the beginning of the seventeenth century, of the traditional distinction between theoretical and practical medicine (whose first union is attributed to Herman Boerhaave). The publication of an increasing number of works on specific topics (particular diseases or parts of the body) corresponded to the decreasing number of works devoted to general medical topics; Sydenham’s works on fevers and smallpox, François Bayle and Charles Barbevrac’s on women’s diseases, those by Edward Jorden and Nathaniel Highmore on the physiological causes of hysteria, and many others, were present in Locke’s library.75
Locke’s interest in practical medicine was also apparent in the definition of the three branches of medicine as ‘histories’, a term which recalled Bacon’s empirical approach. The empiricism of Baconian philosophy shaped medical thought in the Oxford of Locke's youth, encouraging clinical medicine and direct observation, and disparaging research based upon a priori hypotheses. Bacon urged physicians to study the natural history of phenomena by making a series of specific inquiries, so that the mass of observed facts accumulated throughout a long period of time would lead them to formulate some general explanation. The close dependence of the advancement of knowledge on the compilation of natural histories was frequently insisted on by Locke,76 also in the adversaria, as we shall see.
To Aristotle’s De sensu corresponded the last subheading in Scheme 1, ‘Sensus’, which was the most reworked judging by the presence of some deletions. ‘Sensus’ was followed by ‘Objecta sensuum’, which introduced the five objects of sense. Each of
' Locke possessed two editions of Sydenham’s Opera universa (LJL, nos. 2812- 2813), together with his Observai tones medieae circa morborum acutorum hisloriam (IJL, no. 2814), Processus integri (LJL. no. 2815), Schedula monitoria (LJL, no. 281 i), Epistolae responsoriae duae de morbis epidemicis (LJL, no. 2816), Opuscula (LJL no. 2816a), and Dissertatio epistolaris... circa curationem variolarum confluent turn (LJL, no. 2810), As for Bayte and Barbeyrae’s works, see respectively LJL, nos. 233 and 200; Jorden and Highmore’s works are respectively in IJL, nos. 1584 and 1451b,
76 See E lil.xi.24 and 25, 521-22; IV.xii.12, 647.
98
them, apart from ‘Odores’, was linked to one or more artes: ‘Colores pictoria et tinctorial ‘Soni Musica’; ‘Odores’; ‘Sapores Coquinaria’77; ‘Tactiles qualitates Calor frigus et de his omnibus artes mechanicae’. Probably the mechanical arts Locke was thinking of in this last ease were those pertaining to husbandry (a subject of great interest for him, as many works in his library, in particular those by Hartlib, suggest),714 which were all regulated according to the climate.
The importance attributed to mechanical arts in Scheme 1 conformed to the teachings of Bacon’s Novum Organon; it also recalled their appreciation in the Puritan William Ames’s Technometria, which listed a great number of them. Both Bacon and Ames had criticized the prejudice surrounding mechanical arts; Ames insisted that there was nothing in them which could be inappropriate for an honest man, or render him less capable of virtuous actions, and that they should be rather considered ‘ad societatem privatam et publicam promovendam maxirne necessariae’. 9 Ames’s Technometria was the science of defining and delineating the arts according to their nature and use. Any art introduced the idea of eupraxia, which existed primarily in God from whom all things emanated. Mechanical arts introduced their own peculiar ideas of eupraxia; only a few of the many listed in the Technometria, which were classified according to the qualitates elementorum (colour, sound, taste and odour) ,
77 Locke’s interest in cookery is attested by the presence in his library of a work by Francois Varenne, Le cuisinier frangois (UL, nos.3051-305la), one of the most influential cookbooks in early modem French cuisine.
78 In 1676 Locke composed a treatise on agronomy which remained unedited until 1766, Observations upon the Growth and Culture of Vines and Olives; the Production of Silk; the Preservations of Fruits. His library included De re rust'wa (UL, no. 639), which contained the works of Palladium, Cato and Varro; among modem authors, the most frequently found is Samuel Hartlib (A discourse of Httsbandrie, UL, no. 1393; see also nos, 1392, 1394 and 1395).
79 See William Ames, Technometria, in his Philosophemata (London. 1643), §100, 73.
811 Ames, Technometria, § 114, 93.
99
appeared in Scheme 1. Ames’s influence was tangible in the outline of Thmlogia included in the classification Locke wrote in 1681, and he surely shared many of Ames’s convictions, especially the priority’ of the practical over the speculative.
Before the list of objects of sense, ‘Numerus Arithmetica’, ‘Extensio Geometría’ and ‘Motus’, which had already been mentioned under ‘Materia’, reappeared. ‘Motus’ was linked to ‘Gravitas Pondus mechanica’: Locke considered both gravity and weight as secondary' qualities of matter, depending on the motion of corpuscles. Gravity was not for him, as for Galileo, Descartes and Newton, an intrinsic property of matter. Galileo believed gravity to be the sole source of motion, yet he was unable to make it the object of his physics because it was unintelligible to him.81 Descartes substituted the scholastic account of gravitas as a real quality' of a body, which caused it to move towards the centre of the earth, with a purely mechanical account of the phenomenon in terms of the laws of motion and impact and the size, shape and motion of the particles constituting the heavy body and its ambient medium; yet he considered extension to be the only essential property7 of matter. Descartes and, later, Newton, acknowledged as essential properties of matter only those qualities inherent to a body in some well determined and constant measure, that is, not depending on their variable relation to other bodies. This was not the case with gravity, which implied the interaction of at least two bodies,82
In the Essay, Locke considered gravity (or rather the possibility of an unmediated action at a distance between bodies) as one of the phenomena which were too obscure for the corpuscular hypothesis to illuminate, the others being production of sensation, communication of motion and cohesion; the fourth
*' Galileo, // Saggiatore, 347,
“ This was Newton’s view when writing the first edition of the Principia in the mid IdSOs. See F.. Schliesser, ‘Without God: Gravity as a Relational Property of Matter in Newton’s Treatise' in Vanishing Matter and the Laivs of Motion; Descartes and beyond, ed, D. Jalobeanu and P. R. Anstey (London, 2011), 80-100.
100
edition of the Essay revealed a shift in opinion, due to his reading of Newton’s PrincipiaP Nonetheless, as Locke’s second reply to Stillingfleet made plain/4 he continued to regard gravity as too obscure to be explained mechanically, invoking superaddition in its place (an ingredient scarcely conciliable with mechanism, but fully coherent with the pansophic idea of a physics strictly linked to theology which Locke introduced in Scheme 5).
Locke had also written ‘Quantitas’ and ‘Motus’ below ‘Sensus’, separate from the other topics. In Draft A, quantity was said to be synonymous with number if continued, with extension if discreet.85 Accordingly we may suppose he had initially thought of avoiding the repetition of extension and number, which were probably added later under ‘Sensus’ (perhaps at the time he was composing Scheme 2, where ‘Extensio’ and ‘Numerus’ were no longer mentioned under ‘Materia’). The addition aimed at highlighting the empirical origin of the ideas of extension and number, which Locke considered as the basis of mathematical reasoning.86 In Draft B, he declared that ‘the certein knowledg we have of mathematicall veritys. ..depends on & rises from, the certeine destinct knowledg a man hath of the Ideas of his owne minde, & in this case of those Ideas which he hath at present of several extensions compared i e measured one with an other’,87 Further on, he referred to the comparison of different
83 In the first three editions of the Essay, Locke wrote: ‘How Bodies operate one upon another...is manifestly by impulse, and nothing else. It being impossible to conceive, that Body should operate on what it does not touch’, (E D.viii.l 1,135-36). In the fourth edition, he replaced the claim about bow bodies operate with one about how we can conceive of them operating; lie also omitted a clause appearing in ll.vui.112 of previous editions, that denied unmediated action at a distance.
w John Locke, Mr, Locke 's Reply to the Right Reverend the Lord Bishop of Worcester's Answer to his Second Letter (1699), in Works, iv, 46?.
Locke, Draft A, §44, 78.
86 Locke, Draft B, §26,137.
87 Locke, Drqft B, §44,152.
101
numbers,once again insisting on the certain knowledge of the corresponding ideas. In Draft A, Locke introduced sight as the sense involved in comparing ideas of different extensions, but he referred also to the comparison between different sounds.89 In Draft B. he declared that ‘how certein soever the knowledg of the equality or inequality' of severall magnituds compard is, yet it belongs not solv to extension but all other simple Ideas whose degrees are capable of being measurd’, 90 once again he introduced the example of different sounds. The ideas of number and extension were therefore to be conceived as involved in the comparison between all the different sensible qualities.
The mention of extension and number under ‘Sensus’ (but also that of motion, which Locke considered as an idea deriving from the combined action of different senses)?1 is further evidence of the empiricist perspective which he assumed when writing Scheme 1. This perspective would be maintained in the other schemes with reference to the object of physica special is-, as for physica generaiis, which in Scheme 1 hosted the basic concepts of mechanism, its content would be the object of a deep rethinking in Scheme 2, perhaps provoked by Locke’s reading of a work Boyle published in 1671. What resulted?
2.2 Scheme 2. Physica in ‘Sapientia 72’ (Bodl. MS Locke c. 28, ff. 40-41)
In the classification Locke wrote in 1672, entitled ‘Sapientia’, the first part of the scheme of Physica changed significantly. ‘Mundus sive Universum’ and ‘Materia Corpus’ were the only **
** Locke, Draft B, §47, 154.
w Locke, Draft A, §12,23; Draft B. §34, 153-54.
* Locke, Draft B, §45, §153.
J'' Locke, Draft A, §8, 20: ‘the minde is funishd with the simple Ideas of things brought in by the senees as of light & colours by the eys, sounds by the ears, smels by nostrils lasts by the mouth & palate & all tangible qualitys by touch, & some other Ideas from more senses then one as distance & motion by the eys and touch’.
items mentioned. The first took the place of ‘Materia’, which was the subheading under which the various topics pertaining to physica generalis were grouped in Scheme 1. The addition of ‘Corpus’ seemed intended to compensate for the shortening of the heading (Physica, which substituted Physica corporum scientia of Scheme 1). The postponing of ‘Materia Corpus’ to ‘Mundus sive Universum’ suggested the adoption of a different perspective: physica generalis was primarily intended as the discipline investigating the totality of the universe, and secondarily as the study of matter and individual bodies. This change, which represented a detachment from the Aristotelian model, where cosmology followed the exposition of the general principles of natural bodies, might owe something to Locke’s reading of Boyle’s Systematical or Cosmical Qualities of Things (1671).
As Boyle himself had affirmed, the book represented a development of a subject he had already introduced in The Origin, the reciprocal effects of bodies one upon the other. But while in The Origin the effects taken into consideration were only those impressed on a body by the surrounding ones, the perspective was extended in Cosmical Qualities', what Boyle intended to focus on were ‘the impressions that a body may receive, or the power it may acquire from those vulgarly unknown or at least unheeded agents by which it is thus affected, not only upon the account of its own peculiar texture or disposition but by virtue of the general fabric of the world’.9' The ‘unheeded agents’ Boyle named were three: ‘the subterraneal parts of the world we inhabit; the stars, whether fixed or wandering, with the aether that is about them; and the atmosphere or air we live in’. However he noted that there were, in addition, ‘several grand mundane bodies, and diverse laws and customs of nature which may contribute (more or less) to the phaenomena of the qualities we are treating of. The peculiarity of cosmical attributes with respect to the qualities inherent to bodies was therefore their dependence upon a vast bundle of relations,
1,5 Boyle, Works, iii, 30?,
linking together the various bodies in ‘the grand system or world they are parts of.93 The entire universe was crossed by interconnections whose nature and laws were to be inquired into. In the Costnical Suspicions added as an appendix to Cosinical Qualities, Boyle insisted on the possible communication between the earth, the stars and the interstellar space as a subject worthy of inquiry;there might be, he reflected, ‘some cosmical law or custom of the terrestrial globe, or at least of the planetary vortex'9' which was responsible for terrestrial phenomena such as tides, new epidemic diseases and magnetic or atmospheric variations, whose nature still awaited clarification. Descartes’ three laws of mechanic motion and his seven rules of impact were probably insufficient, in Boyle’s view, to account for various terrestrial phenomena:
I have some time suspected [he continued] that there may be, in the terrestrial globe itself, and the ambient atmosphere, divers, whether customs or laws of nature, that belong to this orb, and may be denominated from it, and seemed to have been either unknown to, or overseen by both scholastical and mathematical writers,9
Boyle also insisted on the necessity to substitute a mathematical hypothesis of the universe with a physical one: the almost exclusive attention placed by the first on «the magnitudes, situations, and motions of the great globes» was to be implemented by a detailed inquiry into the simple and compound bodies of the terrestrial globe, one of the three agents responsible for the cosmical qualities of bodies.
Cosmical attributes of matter were to be carefully
n Boyle, Works, iii, 307.
54 Boyle, Cosmical Suspicions subjoined as an Appendix to the Discourse of the Cosmical Qualities of Things, in Works, iii, 318.
M Boyle, Cosmical Suspicions, 32 i.
fl> Boyle, Cosmical Suspicions, 319.
104
distinguished, Boyle insisted, from magnitude, shape and motion, the ‘primitive modes and catholick affections of matter’/7 These were not relational qualities, and were therefore to be excluded from the investigation. The absence of extension, number and motion from physica general is in Scheme 2 suggests that Locke had intepreted Boyle’s Cosmical Qualities as an invitation to renew the content of theoretical physics, which should primarily focus on the cosmical attributes of bodies and on the ‘unheeded relations’ upon which they depended. The identity established between ‘Mundus’ and ‘Universum’ in Scheme 2 (‘Mundus sive Universum’, which substituted the ‘Universum Mundus Creatio’ of Scheme 1) seemed intended to emphasize the Boylean idea of a causal interconnection between terrestrial and celestial phenomena,98
The four elements listed under ‘ Codes tia' were more easily recognizable in Scheme 2, for ‘Terra’ substituted ‘Terrestria’; ‘Fossilia’ was linked to ‘Terra’, which became ‘Terra et fossilia’. 99 The initial deletion and subsequent rewriting of
97 Boyle, Cosmical Qualities, 306.
98 The identity established between ‘Mundus* and ‘Universum’ seems to be a rejection of the Stoics’ theory, according to which the two terms were not synonymous; the first one corresponded to the finite world, whereas the second included both tire latter and the totality of the infinite void space. In the Drafts, Locke did not take a neat position on the plenist-vacuist debate and it is doubtful that the locution 'Mundus sive Universum* should be interpreted as a rejection of vacuism. Rather, Locke might have been thinking of solving the ambiguity which Boyle registered at the beginning of his Cosmical Suspicions, (Works, iii, 316): ‘in regard the world, whether we take it in the larger sense for the whole universe or in the more narrow but not Jess common acceptance, for the globe we men inhabit, is a subject so vast’, Boyle commonly used both terms as synonymous.
"Stensen’s Prodromus introduced what may be defined as a work of scientific geology, hut its influence was not relevant in the seventeenth century. In later times, Locke showed a particular interest In die works by Thomas Burnet concerning the origin of the earth: his library contained Burnet’s The Sacred Theory of the Earth, containing an account of the original of the earth (London, 1684; LJL, no, 534), his Archaeologia philosophies,, sive dactrina anthpm de rerum originihus (London, 1692; LJL, no. 533) and his Reflexions upon the Theory of the Earth (London, 1699; UL. no. 535), as well as odter works relating to dte intense debate which Burnet’s writings occasioned,
105
C":
£fi
-Hi*''.
‘Fossilia’, as well as the deletion of ‘Geographia physica’ and the absence of‘Meteors’ and ‘Mare’ (which in Scheme 1 were linked respectively to ‘Terrestria’, ‘Aer’ and ‘Aqua’) suggests that Locke could have been thinking of the four elements in a different way with respect to his previous scheme, perhaps as those ‘unheeded agents’ to which Boyle adverted in Cos mica I Qualities, including stars, the ether surrounding them, the atmosphere and the earth.
Several deletions appeared under ‘Animalia’, where Locke had added ‘Anima brutorum’, ‘Serpentia’, ‘aquatica’ (which substituted the deleted ‘Natantia’) and ‘anphybia’. ‘Volucres’ substituted ‘volatilia’ of Scheme 1. ‘Serpentia’ was written above ‘Reptilia’, which had been deleted; the species mentioned became therefore six, respectively ‘Gressilia’, ‘Serpentia’, ‘insecta’, ‘volucres’, ‘aquatica’ and ‘anphybia’. Their order was different than that of Scheme 1, for terrestrial animals preceded the other species. In his Onomasticon Zoicon, published in 1668, the natural philosopher Walter Charleton divided species into quadrupedia, serpentia, insecta, aves and pisces; the same ordering is used in Scheme 2. Locke, then, might have taken Charleton’s classification as a model100 to which he added ‘anphybia’, which in the Essay represented the species connecting terrestrial to aquatic animals and thus constituted an indispensable link in the chain of being.101
The addition of ‘anima brutorum’ is also deserving of fuller comment. In 1672, the same year in which ‘Sapientia’ was written, Thomas Willis published his De anima brutorum,102 heavily influenced by Pierre Gassendi’s Syntagma
'm Locke possessed both Charieton’s Onomasticon zoicon (London, 1668, LJL, no. 669b), and his Exerchationes de differentiis et nominihus animalinm (Oxford, 1677; LJL, no. 668), Besides, he possessed some pioneering works by seventeenth-century English zoologists such as John Caius (LJL, nos. 563- 565).
im EIJLvi.12, 447.
m Thomas Willis, De anima brutorum, quae horn inis vital is ac sens diva est, exercitationes duae (Oxford, 1672).
106
philosophicum. In contrast with Descartes, who denied animals had souls, and at the same time in contrast with Daniel Sennert, who claimed that the souls of humans and beasts are alike, Gassendi affirmed that animals must have their own peculiar souls, since they show evidence of memory, reason, and similar traits. He called this the ‘soul of brutes’, and spoke of its being present in man as an ‘inferior’ soul.
Following out Gassendi’s line of thought, Willis developed his own conception of the soul grounded on Cartesian dualism, which attributed both a corporeal soul and a rational soul to man. The corporeal soul, which was inferior and possessed in common with other animals, corresponded to the Cartesian res externa, whereas the rational soul corresponded to the res cogitans. Locke’s interest in this topic, which had considerable theological implications,103 was signalled by some remarks concerning the distinction between the idea of the brute and the idea of man in the Drafts.104 If he did not dwell on animal psychology there, in the Essay he would attribute perception, memory and a limited ability to compound simple ideas into complex ones to animals, though not the capacity for abstraction.10 ' Several medical notes which Locke wrote at various points of his life showed a continuing interest in brute-human combinations,10*’ which might equally be linked to his concern with the position of man in the scale of beings. As we shall go on to see, his interest in the debate concerning the brute soul is also visible in Scheme 5. But that is
103 Locke refused to attribute immortality to brute souls: see Locke, Mr. Locke '$ Reply, in Works, ni, 466.
104 See Locke, Draft A, §41, 69; Draft B, §78, 185. In later times, Locke acquired Antoine Dilly’s De fame des bêtes (I,yon, 1676; UL, no. 82), which represented a direct development of the Cartesian automaton theory.
H,s See E ll.vi.12, 447: ‘There are some Brutes, that seem to have as much Knowledge and Reason, as some that are called Man’. Compare II.x.10; ILxUS; ll.xi.7; II, xi.10. 106
106 See Dewhurst, John Locke, 78-79. 128, 163, 241, 260. See also E lH.xi.20, 519 on ‘monstrous Births’.
107
$
gl
&
to anticipate. Let us continue for the present to outline the more striking features of Scheme 2.
Some new items were added under the subheading ‘Anima’, respectively ‘Facilitates’, ‘perceptio Imaginatio’ and ‘Memoria’; to these, Tntellectus’ and ‘Voluntas’, which were already in Scheme 1, followed. The various topics and their order recalled tire various steps of that ‘history of the rise & originall of human knowledge’ which Locke described in the Drafts, 7 that is to say perception, the production of ‘Ideas or Images of things’ affecting our senses,108 their retention in the memory (the faculty reviving those images produced by objects in our mind), and their being conveyed into understanding.109 The will was the faculty on which, as Locke declared in Draft A, ‘Assent, Suspense, or dissent’ with respect to any proposition depended.110
‘Passiones’ did not figure in Scheme 2; the only mention of passions in ‘Sapientia 72’ was under the head Prudentia (‘Passionum suaruin regimen’), where they had already appeared in the previous classification. In Scheme 1, a gloss after ‘Passiones' introduced an explicit reference to Theologia, which drew out what w?as implied in the mention of ‘Creatio’ under ‘Materia’; both the gloss and ‘Creatio’ were absent from Scheme 2, as they would be from Scheme 4 (1681). The dependence of Physica on Theologia became therefore less evident; the several topics added under the latter in ‘Sapientia 72’, but also the important modifications introduced in physica generalis, suggest that Locke might have been more interested, for the moment, in inquiring into the two disciplines separately. The last classification shows a radical shift in perspective in this regard.
No significant change occurred under the last subheading, ‘Sensus’, in Scheme 2: Locke had only deleted the adjective
137 See Locke, Orafi B §31, 140.
Locke, Orafi B, §31, 128; see aiso Orafi A,§ 1, 1. 109 Locke, Orafi B, §§ 23-24, 134-35.
319 Locke, Orafi A, §42,73.
108
‘mechanicae’, which in Scheme 1 referred to those arts concerning tactile qualities. With this deletion, he might have intended to include medical arts (surgery, for instance), where hot and cold represented two fundamental principles: also in Scheme 4, the adjective ‘mechanicae’ is absent.
Scheme 4 contains a few, though particularly interesting, novelties with respect to Scheme 2; but before examining them, it is opportune to consider the various adversaria which Locke wrote in 1677, which, though they do not represent, properly speaking, classifications, clearly illustrate the importance he assigned to the Baconian method of natural histories and to mechanical arts.
2.3 Physica and natural histories in Locke’s adversaria (1677)
The composition of adversaria, i.e. notebooks collecting excerpta and loci communes extrapolated from discourses and orations, was an ancient practice originating in classic topics and rhetoric; it was widely employed also in the subsequent centuries. This practice underwent a rapid evolution in the sixteenth and especially in the seventeenth century, when the notebook ceased to be conceived of as a deposit for rhetorical tools and became an instrument based on conventional rules of archiving, independent from criteria relating to content.111 The method of common- placing Locke elaborated during his time in France (1675-79), later published in Jean Le Clerc’s Bibliothèque Universelle,1 " was evidence of his great interest in this practice, which found expression in the many adversaria he wrote in 1677.
111 Cf. J. M. Chatelaine, ‘Les recueils à'adversaria aux xvie et xvüe siècles: des pratiques de la lecture savante au style de l'érudition', in Le livre et l 'historien. Etudes offertes en l’honneur du Professeur Henry-Jean Martin, ed. F. Barbier (Geneva, 1997). Locke’s interest in cataloguing is also attested by the pigeon-hole cabinet he devised for the storage of rolled papers in 1680: see Locke to Toinard, Dec. 13, 1680, in Com, ii, 315-22. 113
113 John Locke, ‘A New Method of a Common-Place-Boak, Translated Out of the French from the Second Volume of the Bibliothèque Universelle’, in H arks, ii, 441-59.
Locke’s adversaria contained guidelines for the writing of commonplace books. The first (MS Locke f 15, pp. 119-120, henceforth A) consisted of an undated outline entitled ‘Adversaria’ in Locke’s pocket memorandum book for June 16 77-June 1678. The outline had been crossed out with diagonal lines, indicating it had been copied elsewhere.11' A second outline entitled ‘Adversaria 19 Aug 77’ (MS Locke c. 28, f. 50, henceforth B), was almost identical to the first, which might have been copied here with very few additions. A third outline, which I will call here Scheme 3 (MS Locke f. 2, pp. 247-52, dated 4 Sept. 1677), was written in English, not in Latin, and not in the tabular form of die other adversaria. A fourth scheme (MS Locke f. 15, pp. 122-23, henceforth C) seemed to represent a reworking of B. Scheme 3 was less fully realised than C, and so might have been written before it. A fifth outline, entitled ‘Adversaria 12 Nov. 77’ (MS Locke c. 28, f. 51, henceforth D), represented a reworking of C, as would seem to be confirmed by a few additions and strong similarities. I will start by considering Scheme 3, which exhibits several noteworthy differences from the other adversaria.
Scheme 3 began with a declaration of intent. Locke’s purpose was to find a method for identifying ‘the principall parts or heads of things to be taken notice of in ‘reading books and making Adversaria’. To this purpose, he listed four headings, respectively ‘Adversaria philosophica’, ‘Adversaria Histórica’, ‘Adversaria Immitanda5 and ‘Adversaria Acquirenda’. Under each heading, some lines illustrating the object and the faculty involved were added: ‘Adversaria philosophica’ encompassed those topics concerning the ‘knowledg of things’ and requiring the use of judgment, whereas ‘Adversaria Histórica’ incorporated those topics necessitating the use of memory (opinions and traditions concerning religion; religious and civil institutions). The practices and arts mentioned under ‘Adversaria Immitanda’, and the
!! 3 There is another, incomplete outline entitled adversaria on p, 110 of MS Locke Í. IS, crossed out as that on pp. 119-120. It does not contain any topics pertaining to
physics.
110
‘naturall products’ and ‘merces’ cited under ‘Adversaria Acquirenda’, referred to the sphere of action. In A, B, C and D, the headings were three, respectively Conoscendorum, with its subheading ‘Philosophical Reminiscendorum, to which both ‘Histórica civilia’ and ‘Histórica Physica’ were linked; and Agendorum, with its subheadings ‘Immitanda’ and ‘Acquirenda’.114 Understanding, memory and will were therefore the three faculties to which Locke referred, the same triumvirate discussed by Descartes in his Metaphysical Meditations. Locke’s reading of the latter, and several other Cartesian works, is attested by the journal he kept during his travels in France.115
Scheme 3 terminated with the introduction of another head, ‘Histórica Physica’: as shown by the other adversaria, the latter was to be intended as a subheading of ‘Adversaria Histórica’. The object of ‘Hystorica Physica’ in Scheme 3 was said to be the ‘history of naturall causes and effects’. This topic required the reader of books to take note of
those severall propertys of bodys & the severall effects that several! bodys or their qualitys have one upon an other, & principally to remark those that may contribute either to the improvem[en]t of arts or give light into the nature of things w[hi]ch is that w[hi]ch 1 cald above philosophies w[hi]ch: I conceive to consist in having a true cleare & destinct Idea of the nature of any thing w[hi]ch in naturall things or reall beings because we are ignorant of their essence takes in their causes propertys & effects or as much of them as we can know, & in Moral 1 beings their essence & consequence.
The topics to which attention should be devoted when reading books on physics (i.e. the properties and effects of tilings) should therefore be catalogued in two different sections for Locke, one
114 A more detailed description is in Di Hiase, 'Theologia, Ethics and Natural Law’. 200-4.
115 On Locke’s early reading of Descartes, sec G. A. J. Rogers, 'Descartes and the Mind of Locke: the Cartesian Impact on Locke's Philosophical Development', in Descartes: it metodo e i saggi, ed, G, Belgioioso, G. Cimino, P. Costabel, and G. Papuii (Rome 1990), 689-97.
til
i
té:
ír
C;
0>" 'i <¿ ■ uC->
oriented towards practice and the other towards speculation; the writing of natural histories was functional to both these orientations.
This was Bacon’s teaching; natural histories were a fundamental tool, in his view, for ‘laying the foundations of a true and active philosophy’,110 and could be of great use, both as a means to obtain primary knowledge of particular things and as a way to collect ‘the basic stuff and raw material of true induction’.1 s The influence of Bacon’s method of natural history on Locke’s thought was lasting,118 perhaps mediated via Boyle, who had fully endorsed the Baconian programme.119 Locke’s barometric readings were intended as a contribution to the writing of a history of the air, while his early medical essays ‘Anatomia’ and 'De arte medica’ (products of his relationship with Sydenham), referred to a history of diseases. He always conceived the work of natural philosophers as a collective enterprise, aimed at accumulating data throughout time; in the Essay, the writing of histories of natural phenomena was recommended as a relevant instrument for the advancement of knowledge.
In Bacon’s view, the object of natural histories was threefold. They should encompass, first, natural objects or species, second, aberrations of natural objects, and, third, the manipulation of
‘16 Francis Bacon, Parasceve ad historiam naturalem, et experimentalem, in The Oxford Francis Bacon (15 vols,, Oxford, 1985-), xi, 453. See also, in the same volume, Great Instauraban, 37-38, and Novum Organum, 215,
Francis Bacon, Parasceve, 455. Compare Descriptio glohi intellectualis, in The Oxford Bacon, vi, 104-7.
s After Boyle. Bacon is the most frequently found natural philosopher in Locke’s library (see UL, nos. 162-78a).
By the middle of the 1660s, Locke had read all the works Boyle had published on natural philosophy, one of which, Certain Physiological Essays (London, 1669), explicitly promoted the Baconian programme. Regarding Locke, Boyle and Bacon’s method of natural history, see Anstey, John Locke, 51 59.
112
nature by ‘art and human agency’,u>) Natural objects should be distributed in natural histories into five categories: celestial objects, regions of the air, earth and sea, elements (i.e. vast bodies such as mountains) and species (metals, plants and animals). In Scheme 3, Locke referred to a division of natural objects into species (a ‘Historia Physica, referenda secundum species’), yet he did not mention any of them, probably considering his schemes of physics as being more suitable to this scope. Also in A, B and C there was no mention of any particular species of natural objects; only in D did he introduce a list of species, but it was probably a later addition, as 1 shall try to demonstrate at the end of this section.
A ‘history of natural 1 causes and effects’, Locke noted, should mainly focus on those properties, qualities and reciprocal effects of bodies which could contribute either to the improvement of arts, or to the knowledge of things. The latter was the province of ‘Philosophica’ (the first heading), which encompassed both ‘reall beings’ (natural things)121 and ‘moral beings’ (moral ideas).122 The purpose of ‘Philosophica’, Locke continued, was the acquisition of true, clear and distinct ideas of things: truth was the first requirement imposed on ideas, before Cartesian clarity or distinctness.12-’ Only the essences of moral
120 Bacon, Parasceve, 455; Descriptio, 98-105. The history of the arts (both mechanical and liberal) was the most useful for Bacon, because of its ability to remove ‘the veil from natural things": see Parasceve, 463; Descriptio, 108-9.
121 As for the meaning of this expression, see Locke’s journal entry For 20 January 1677, where he opposed an ‘imaginary space’ to space as ‘any real! being’ (Ati Early Draft. 102).
122 The expression ‘moral beings’, by which Locke meant notions such as moral goodness or badness, is also to be found in Draft 8, §161,270. See also E II.xxviii. i4, 358. 123
123 Unlike Descartes, Locke did not consider clarity and distinctness as twin criteria of truth: both, for him, were properties of individual ideas. Truth was a property of propositions (which consist in 'the joining or separating or signs’ either in the mind or verbally: see E, lV.v.2, 574), The clarity and distinctness of individual ideas was a precondition for joining or separating them in propositions properly, but truth was a criterion to be applied only to the latter. Nonetheless, Locke spoke frequently of tme
ideas could be known, those of natural tilings being out of the reach of human understanding: this was a basic thesis in Locke’s empiricism, which he argued in several of his writings.U4
The object of ‘Histórica Physica’ was more briefly characterized in the other adversaria. In A it consisted of those 'properties, effects and qualities of bodies which maximally concern use or knowledge [and] which have to be divided into groups (in capita) according to their Species’. 125 The same definition reappeared in B, in C (though slightly abbreviated), and in D, In A and B another topic appeared under ‘Histórica Physica’, ‘Bonitas’ (that is, goodness). Its inclusion in this place became more intelligible in C, where the term was accompanied by a gloss, ‘signs (Indicia) or things known about the goodness of anything which is commonly used’. In D, the gloss was modified: ‘things known and signs (signa) concerning anything which is good and perfect in its genre’. Paying attention to the supposed or known goodness or perfection of any natural object was therefore the main criterion to be observed when collecting topics under ‘Histórica Physica’: the central purpose of composing natural histories, to determine which things could be good and useful to human life, was highlighted. This was one of Locke’s
and fake ideas (as also Scheme 3 testifies). In E lV.xxxii.4, 385 he explained that ‘Whenever the Mind refers any of its Ideas to any tiling extraneous to them, they are then capable to be called true or false. Because the Mind in such a reference, makes a tacit Supposition of their Conformity to that Thing: which Supposition, as it happens to be true wfalse-, so the Ideas themselves come to be denominated’.
M See Locke, ‘De arte medica’ (1669), in Dewhurst ed., Dr. Thomas Sydenham (1624-1689% His Life and Original Writings (Berkeley, CA, 1966), 82; Draft A, §2, 7:’we have as cleare a notion of the essence of a spirit as any one hath of the essence of body, the one being supposd to be without knowing what it is the substratum to those simple Ideas that we receive from without and the other supposd (with a like ignorance of what it is) to be the substratum to those actions we experiment in our selves within'. See also ‘Knowledg its extent & measure’, Feb. 8 1677, in An Early Draft, 85. The essence of moral notions is knowable for Locke because they are ‘Creatures of the Understanding*: see E III.v. 12,435.
My translation. The original in Latin is in the appendix, where the various schemes and adversaria are reproduced.
114
firmest convictions: knowledge should always be increased to the end of improving the ‘conveniences of this life’ (a scope with respect to which human faculties were perfectly adequate). It was not an end in itself.126 127
As has already been said, no species of natural objects was cited under ‘Histórica physica’ in any of the adversaria; only in D did a list at the bottom of the last page introduce anything of this kind. The list contained nine numbered topics preceded by an unnumbered one:
‘Histórica physica sc.: of incorporeal things— Spiritum; Io all those things which occur beyond our atmosphere or—Oupavika; 2° Those things which occur in our atmosphere—Meteorica; 3° [Those things which occur] In the seas, rivers and lakes—Hydrographica; 4° On Earth—Geographica; 5° In the kingdom of sensitivity—Animalium; 6° In the intellectual kingdom— Hominum; 7° In the vegetable kingdom—Vegetabilium; 8° Subterranean things—Fossilium; 9° anything in any of them going beyond the usual course of nature which is said to be a prodigy or a miracle—Mira’.
The list might have been added later, as is suggested by the smaller characters of the writing, by its location at the bottom of the page and, above all, by its content: various topics in it show' relevant similarities with the contents of Scheme 5. The mention of ‘Spiritum’ and ‘Mira’ is symptomatic of the adoption of a different perspective regarding the object of ‘Histórica Physica’, the one Locke would endorse in Scheme 5 with reference to the object of Physica. But this is only an anticipation.
The importance assigned to the ‘improvement of arts’ in the definition of the object of ‘Histórica Physica’ was restated in Scheme 3 under the heading ‘Adversaria Immitanda’. The object
126 E I.i.5, 45; II.xxiii.12, 302.
1271 do not translate ‘Spiritum’, ‘Meteora’, etc. in order to render easier comparison with the subheadings in the various schemes of Physica. As for the Greek term Oupavika (which derives from oúpavóq), the absence of the proper diacritics suggests that Locke was interested primarily in the utility of general schemes for organising his own thinking rather than perfect rectitude.
115
of the latter was said to encompass ‘what soever wise practices are to he found either for governing of policies or a mans private self or any beneficall arts'. These practices were further distributed among three disciplines, respectively ‘Politica sive Sapientia civilis’, ‘Pradentia sive Sapientia privata’ and ‘Physica sive artesh Under the latter, in Scheme 3 Locke listed ‘drinking (Potum); food (Cibum); Medicine; motion or Mechanics; Sense objects'. In A, B and C, die objects of ‘Physica’ were ‘those arts which can be rendered apt to our use’; in D, ‘industry in art practice (artis solertiam) or diose things which can be accommodated to our use and possessions’. Under ‘Physica’, in A Locke listed ‘Food; Drinking; Medicine; Veterinary science; Mechanics; Chemistry; Pharmaceutics’; the last two were probably added later, for diey were absent from B but reappeared in C. Some other topics were added in a separate column, i. e. motion (which was linked to Mechanics, the scientia motus), sense objects (sensuum objecta), things helping senses (sensus adiuvandos), things which have to be preserved or improved on (res conservandas vel meliorandas), the species of all these things (haec omnia Species), These topics were all to be intended as objects of different arts; the list reappeared slightly modified in B, with ‘Clothes’ (Vestitum) being added after ‘Drinking’.128 The other topics, again slightly modified, were present: ‘motion; sense objects; senses to be sharpened (sensus acuendos); things to be improved on or preserved; all these things according to their Species’. In C, oeconomiam was added after ‘Clothes’. Locke had previously written, and then deleted, supellectilem (furniture) in Its place. Pharmaceutics and chemistry reappeared before veterinary science. The list ended with a reference to the other arts (aliaque artes). No relevant change appeared in D, apart from
m ‘Veterinaria* seems to have been added later both in A and B, given the lack of space between the topics preceding and following it; also ‘Vestitum.’ in B seems to be a later addition. Both the topics reappear in C; Locke might have copied them in the previous adversaria when composing the latter,
116
the substitution of oeconomiam (which was also mentioned under ‘Prudentia’ in C and D) with supellectilem.m
The growing number of mechanical arts mentioned in the adversaria is evidence of the great value which Locke attributed to tire practice of them (the promotion oí soler tía in D)f even of the lowest ones such as vestiaria. By contrast, major arts such as architecture, painting and sculpture, were not cited (the first would be introduced in Scheme 4, whereas the second was mentioned in Scheme 1 and I). Like Bacon and Ames, but also like Samuel Hartlib, whose ideas on a universal reformation were surely of great interest to both Boyle and his entourage,ljlJ Locke wished to highlight the great moral and educational value of mechanical arts. Their relevance would be confirmed by the Essay, where the practice of ‘useful arts’ was characterized as a fundamental ingredient for the flourishing of human societies, and emphasised yet more strongly in Some Thoughts concerning Education, where Locke would insist on their educative value.1'"
129 On a loose sheet in ‘Adversaria 1661’ located between pp. 24 and 25, an incomplete adversaria containing only ‘Histórica Physica’ and ‘Agendorum lmmitanda-Acquirenda’ is to be found. The definitions of ‘Histórica Physica’ and ‘Acquirenda’ are more similar to those in B than those in A or in the other adversaria, though the topics listed under ‘Physica sive artes’ are less numerous than those in B or A. One of them, ‘adjutoria’ recalls the ‘sensus adiuvandos’ in A more than the ‘sensus acuendos’ in B, C and D. The incomplete adversaria might therefore have been written between A and B. A description and transcription of the manuscript is accessible via The Digital Locke Project, directed by Paul Schuurman (Amsterdam, 2006), further details of which are available from http^Avww.libiaries,psu.e<lurtas/lock«' index.html#jca.
130 Regarding the relationship between Boyle, Hartlib and the ‘Invisible College”, see Michael Hunter, Boyle's Studies: Aspects of the Life arid Thought of Robert Boyle (1627-91) (London, 2015), esp. 44-48; regarding Locke and Hartlib, see (with reservations) N. Wood, John Locke and Agrarian Capitalism (Berkeley, 1984), esp. 22- 26,
13! E IV.xii. 11, 646; see also III.x.9, 495, where he deplored the bad reputation, of the mechanical arts. 132
132 Cf, Some Thoughts concerning Education, ed. J. W. and J. S. Yolton (Oxford, 2003) §202, 256, where Locke listed ‘Painting, Turning, Gardening, Tempering and Working in Iron, arid all other useful Arts’; m §206, 258, he added "Delving. Planting, inoculating', and in §209, 260 'Perfuming, Varnishing, Graving and several sorts of
117
Besides, the list of arts in the adversaria was indicative of Locke's personal interests: this was clearly the case with medicine, chemistry and pharmaceutics (whose presence also highlighted the increasing relevance it had assumed in seventeenth-century English medicine).1" Veterinary science, too, had attracted Locke's interest during his time in France, as some notes in his journals attest!34 Sensus adiuvandos/acuendos might refer to optical devices {optica would be introduced in Scheme 4),l3s as well as to acoustic devices.1,6 Res conservandas vel meliorandas was an expression used in the Codex civilis with
working in Iron, Brass. and Silver...io cut, pollish and set precious Stones [and] grinding and polishing Optical Glasses'. The art of keeping accounts was recommended in POS. 260; manual arts were lauded in §207,259.
” A great part of Locke’s medical activity consisted in the preparation of remedies, as his notes and correspondence suggest; he possessed several treatises on pharmacology and recipe books, such as those by Valerius Cordus, Leonardo Fioravanti and Luigi Anguiílara (UL. nos. 846, 1127 and 94). He also possessed, among others, a work by the Helmonfian Johannes Michaeiis, whom he described in a note in his diary of 6 November 1685 as 'the incomparable chemist of Leipsig’ (UL. no. 1987b). The complete catalogue of books on pharmacology in Locke’s library is in UL. Appendix v, 303; for chemistry, see 294.
134 John Lough, Locke’s Trmels in Frame 1675-79 (Cambridge, 1953), 247. See also K. Dewhurst, ’Some 17th-century veterinary notes from the journals of Joint Locke (1632-1704)’, Veterinary Record 74 (1962); 996-99. Much of the information concerning the care of animals fell under the heading ‘husbandry’ in the seventeenth century, a subject whose study Locke recommended in Some Thoughts; also almanacs were important sources of information on veterinary science, and Locke was particularly interested in them (see UL, nos. 78a, b, c etc.; see also Locke to Toinard, 10 June ¡ 680, Corr , ii, 194).
’ Locke had read Descartes’ Dioptrique in the early sixties; see G. A. J. Rogers, Lockes Philosophy: Content and Context (Oxford, 1994), 37-38. Only two texts on optics, both by personal acquaintances, are to be found in Locke’s library, the Dioptrica nova of William Molyneux and Newton’s Optica (UL nos. 2011 and 2082),
Bacon had shown particular interest in ‘ear-spectacles’ (ear-trumpets) in his Syiva Sylvarum. Locke surely knew Samuel Morland, the author of Tuha Stentoro- Phonica: an Instrument of Excellent Use. as welt as at Sea, as at Land (London, 1672). Locke possessed other works by Morland, in particular one on cryptography; UL, no. 2054a), In 168), Nicolas Toinard reported to him on the ‘Acoustique’ devised by Jean HautefeuilJe (Corr., ii, 344),
reference to the administration of the patrimony, and therefore to be linked to the artes oeconomicae.
A mention of Physica was also to be found under the first heading, ‘Philosophiea’, though not in all the adversaria. In Scheme 3, the object of ‘Philosophiea’ was said to be 4the knowledge of things their essence and nature, properties causes and consequences of each species’; since only the essence of moral ideas could be known for Locke (as he declared under ‘Histórica Physica’), the ‘things’ to which ‘Philosophiea’ referred embraced both real objects and moral ideas. In A, the object of ‘Cognoscendorum: Philosophiea’ was said to be ‘whatever may lead to the knowledge of beings (entium) and their causes, properties, effects and consequences so as to have true, clear and distinct ideas of them. Anything occurring of this sort which has to be divided into groups according to the various species of things (;rerum)’. No mention was made of essences; however, two topics added in B and in C to the definition of ‘Philosophiea’, respectively ‘Ethica’ and ‘Physica’, clarified which were the entia to which Locke was referring. Ethics came before physics, as in Scheme 1 and 2: the priority attributed to the first conformed to the hierarchy of duties established by Locke in ‘Study’, to which his classifications conformed.
In D, some relevant changes occurred regarding the object of ‘Philosophiea’, which was characterized in these terms:
whatever may lead to the philosophical knowledge of beings (entium), so as to have true, clear and distinct ideas of their essences, causes effects. 1 those things which pertain to being in general, or Metaphvsica, 2 [those things which pertain] to the species of being (speciemm entis), or Physica, 3 those things which depend on human will, or Ethica.
Physics figured as one of the disciplines pertaining to reason, that is, to ‘philosophical knowledge’. Its objects were the various 137
137 Several references to the way of administrating one’s patrimony are to be found in Locke’s economic writings, as well as in the second of Two Treatises of Government and Some Thoughts concerning Education.
119
‘species of being’, an expression which was not in any of the previous adversaria, where Locke had written ‘species of things’ (Scheme 3: ‘rerum species’ in A, B, C). The last lines in the passage cited just now (those concerning metaphysics, physics and ethics) might have been added later, given the smaller characters of the writing and the deletion of two lines, which they substituted. Locke had initially written: ‘everything of this sort which is to be divided into groups according to the various species of things’, the same sentence which was in the other adversaria, but then he had deleted it and added the new lines concerning metaphysics, physics and ethics. The definition of Physica seemed to have been thought of in strict correspondence with that of metaphysics: the latter represented the science of being in general (the Scholastic ens commune), the former the science investigating die various species of ens.
Locke’s source might have been Francisco Suarez, whose (direct or mediated) influence lj8 was discemable in the classification of 1681 in the priority attributed to Metaphysica with respect to Theologia. In his Metaphysicarum disputationum, Suarez affirmed that the purpose of the various sciences was ‘contemplari varias species entis secundum proprias & specificas rationes scibilis’. This was what differentiated them from metaphysics, the only science which considered ‘omnes species entis sub communi ratione entis’.139 Locke might have returned to adversaria D in 1681 when composing his third classification which, by its contents and organisation, hints that his interest in
138 Burgersdijck’s Institutionum Metaphysicae, one of the main textbooks on metaphysics studied at Oxford in Locke’s time, showed Suarez’s influence; the introduction of metaphysics in ‘Sapientia’ and in the classification of 1681, as well as the precedence attributed to the discipline, might be traced back to his influence, or directly to that of Suarez. As I have argued in ‘Theologia, Ethics and Natural Law’, 191-93, the priority of metaphysics in ‘Sapientia’ is detectable from the numeration (Theologia is numbered 2, Metaphysica 1), not from the effective ordering of the disciplines (Theologia precedes Metaphysica). It is probable that Locke added the numbers in 1681, when composing his new classification.
bi*See Francisco Suarez, Metaphysicarum disputationum (2 vols., Mainz, 1614), i, sec. IF, ehs. xxi xxii, 13.
120
metaphysics had grown significantly. The new lines written under ‘Philosophica’ in place of the deleted ones, but also the addition of ‘Metaphysica’ after ‘Ethica’ and ‘Physica’, which were already included under ‘Philosophica’ in both B and C, might have represented the outcome of a subsequent intervention on D, This seems to be confirmed both by the presence of a curly bracket enclosing ‘Ethica’ and ‘Physica’, but leaving ‘Metaphysica’ out, and by the contrast between the numbers added to the disciplines and their order (‘Metaphysica’ was numbered iV but followed the other two). These later adjustments focussed on the first part of D, the one containing ‘Philosophica’; the interest in Suarez’s metaphysics clarified the peculiar definition of ‘Physica’. However, Locke, it seems, returned again to D when composing his last, troubled classification of 1687, Some similarities between the topics listed at the bottom of the last page of D, referring to ‘Histórica Physica’, and those in that classification appear to support this hypothesis. Locke’s modifying D twice when writing new classifications suggested he might have conceived of both the latter and the adversaria as parts of a single, complex attempt to map the mundus intellegibilis.
The contribution which the various adversaria offer to the understanding of Locke’s conception of Physica is easy to overlook. Yet they highlight the importance he assigned to the method of natural history, as well as the priority he attributed to the improvement of useful arts with respect to speculation. The structure of the adversaria did not allow him to represent the hierarchical order of the various sciences (which was exactly what Locke was attempting to introduce in D when numbering ethics, physics and metaphysics under ‘Philosophica’). This might have been one reason for his preferring classifications. At the least, the classification he worked out in 1681 provides some possible evidence in support of this speculation.
2,4 Scheme 4. Physica in Bodl. MS Locke c. 28, ff, 157-58
Locke wrote two classifications in 1681, ‘Adversaria 1661’, ff. 290-291, and MS Locke c, 28, ff. 157-58. They are almost
121
i^vb
identical, the second being a fair copy of the first. As regards the outline of Physica (Scheme 4), in both Locke added a new element, ‘VaccuunT, under ‘Mundus sive Universum’ and ‘Materia Corpus’, the two topics which pertained to physica generalis. The addition was not a homage paid to Aristole’s Physica, where void was one of the arguments treated. The existence of void was a controversial topic, to which Locke had already referred in Draft A without taking a clear stand on the issue.540 He had simply contrasted the Cartesian plenist account of matter with the vacuist account, in order to show how reasoning based on innate principles was inadequate in determining which (if either) was right. In a journal note written in 1677, he discussed the notion of distance in Cartesian tenns, explaining that space was a ‘bare relation’ between bodies, but in the closing paragraph he proposed an alternative hypothesis, probably inspired by the reading of More’s Antidote against Atheism: ‘If it be impossible to suppose pure noe thing or to extend our thoughts where there is or we can suppose noe being this space void of body must be something belonging to the being of the deity’.141 The paragraph introduced the anti-Cartesian idea of a real but penetrable, and hence incorporeal, space, intended as a divine extension. This idea would be further developed in the Essay% where Locke would introduce the notion of pure space as an idea of the mind completely distinct from that of solidity that
iAS Draft A, §27, 46.
141 See, An Early Draft, 96 (for ¡6 September 1677). In the Appendix of An Antidote to Atheism (1655), ch. 7, §6, 338, More had written ‘if after the removal of corporeal matter out of the world, there will be stilt place and distance in which this very matter, while it was there, was also conceived to lye, and this distant space cannot bat be something, and yet not corporeal, because neither Impenetrable nor tangible, it must of necessity be a substance incorporeal necessarily and eternally existing of itself; which the clearer Idea of a Being absolutely perfect will more fully and punctually inform us to be the self-subsisting Cod. Locke owned two copies of the discussion contained in the appendix, which was printed both in the 1655 edition of the Antidote and in the 1662 Collection of Several Philosophical Writings {UL, nos. 204T and 2046). See Jasper Retd, The Metaphysics of Henry More (Dordrecht, 2012), 137-38.
122
accompanies the materiality of bodies.'42 The reading of More’s work might have played an important role in leading Locke away from a Cartesian, or Hobbesian, identification between extension and body. Certainly it opened up the possibility of rethinking the notion of body and therefore the object or objects of physica generalis, as Scheme 5 and the ‘Division of the Sciences’ at the end of the Essay would go on to illustrate.
The addition of ‘Vaccum’ in Scheme 4 was symptomatic of Locke’s mature conviction of the existence of a void. The latter was also one of the topics of his intense correspondence with the French erudite Nicolas Toinard in 1680, with whom he had become acquainted during his stay in France.
Toinard’s interest in natural philosophy was particularly marked. In that year, 1680, he was conducting several experiments, one of which concerned the possibility of cooking food in a void, another the possibility of creating a void in a receptacle capable of containing a man.14' Toinard faithfully reported on these experiments to Locke. The addition of ‘Vacuum’ in Scheme 4, as well as that of other topics, might be linked to their correspondence; this also seems to be the case for ‘Chronologia’, added after ‘Astronomia’. Several letters which Locke addressed to and received from Toinard around this time concerned horology and the reform of the English calendar.1'*’
142 E II.iv.3, 124.
141 See Toinard to Locke, Oct. 4, 1680, Corr.. ii, 255-56. Toinard invited Locke and Boyle to test whether salted food lost its taste in a void (ii, 266). Locke expressed interest in both experiments (Locke to Toinard, Oct. 4, 1680, ii, 268-69). 144
144 On July 12, 1679 (Corr., ii, 48), Toinard sent the desijpi of a clock capable of five strokes a second, devised by Renter, to Locke; Renter sent a more detailed description of the clock to Locke on July 19, 1679 (ii, 50). On 16 Sept. 168Q, Locke informed Toinard that he had asked Thomas Tompion, ‘the best watchmaker of the town’, for a device his French friend was looking for (a ‘divideing plate' to cut clock wheels accurately; see ii, 251 52); on Dec. 13, 1680, Locke asked Toinard for the description of a small pendulum capable of great precision, devised by Isac Thuret (ii, 319), and in February 1681 he sent to Toinard the design of a clock of his own devising, whose dial marked six hours and their parts (ii, 373). Sporadic remarks on horology appear in the correspondence of the following years. Regarding the measurement of time, see E, U.xiv, 18-24, 187-92. On Nov. 29, 1680 (Corr., it, 309), Locke sent a book
Hie addition of ‘Aether’ before the four elements grouped under ‘Coelom’ (which substituted ‘Coelestia’ of Scheme 1 and 2) might be related to Locke’s meetings with Boyle in 1681 .l b In a journal note for June 26, Locke spoke of an experiment which Boyle had shown him regarding the phenomenon of phosphorescence. Locke referred to Boyle’s treatise on this phenomenon, Aerial Noctiluca, which had appeared in 1680. In this work, Boyle spoke of die ‘subtle Aetherial matter, that abounds in the pores of the Air’; moreover, the cosmic ether was the subject of a letter Isaac Newton had addressed to Boyle in I679,14', which he may have reported to Locke.
The location of ‘Aether’ below ‘Vaccuum’ in Scheme 4 merits a word, for it clearly revealed that Locke did not conceive the former as the fundamental medium for the communication of motion by successive impact. This was the central function assigned to the ethereal fluid in the mechanical system outlined by Descartes, where it was introduced as the best explanation of all those experiments disproving the existence of a vacuum. Rather, as shown by the Essay, Locke considered ether as the possible explanation of extra-mechanical phenomena such as cohesion or magnetism; this was also the function which Boyle assigned to it, though Locke appeared to be less optimistic than Boyle regarding the explanatory power of this hypothesis. In his Sceptical Chymist, Boyle seemed to accept the existence of a materia subtilis agitating the particles of matter, and in other works of his he introduced the existence of ether as a plausible hypothesis. In his Cosmical Suspicions, for example, he stated
by the mathematician Jonas Moore to Toinard, concerning a way of reforming the English calendar. References to this topic are also in the letter Locke sent to Toinard on June 10,1680 fii, 191 > and in the correspondence of the subsequent years.
i45 See Dewhurst, John Locke, 201, 203, 207, 208.
46 Dewhum, John troche, 203; see Boyle, Aerial Noctiluca (London, 1680), 37; LJL, no. 438.
’47 CUL MS Add. 9597/2/18/62-65, dated Febr. 28, 1678/9.
124
that the subtle particles composing ether could account for the absence of a complete void and the mechanical interactions between bodies, as well as for other phenomena such as cohesion, magnetism and, possibly, gravity, which were inexplicable on the basis of the purely mechanical interactions of macroscopic bodies.148 The results of Boyle’s attempts to demonstrate the existence and properties of the Cartesian materia subtil is were controversial,149 yet a lack of experimental evidence was not the reason why, in the Essay, Locke declared the hypothesis of ether inadequate to account for cohesion.130 The various objections15 ‘ he moved in this regard showed he considered it as an ‘ingenious’ tool, which obscured or postponed the real problem, our total
148 Boyle, Cosmical Suspicions, in Works, hi, 316-17. Boyle differeutiaied between two kinds of ethereal matter, one fit for the propagation of mechanical motions across distances, the other possessing powers adequate to account for extra-mechanical phenomena like magnetism, in which the forces at work were apparently of a unique kind and could not therefore be reduced to universal, orderly mechanical motions. The first kind of ethereal matter consisted in ‘more numerous and uniform sorts of minute particles’, the second in ‘peculiar sorts of corpuscles that have yet no distinct name, which may discover peculiar faculties and ways of working, when they meet with bodies of such a texture as disposes them to admit, or to concur with, the efficacy of these unknown agents’. The right- and left-handed screw-shaped magnetic particles to which Descartes referred in the Principia were probably only a highly speculative hypothesis for Boyle; he mentioned the different ‘bigness and figure’ which Cartesians attributed to ethereal matter only en passant in his Cosmical Qualities (Works, iii, 309).
119 Experiment xxxviii described in A Continuation of New Experiments Physico- Mechanical, Touching the Spring and Weight of the Air, and their Effects {Works, iii, 250-56), neither confirmed nor disproved the existence of materia subtUts, though Boyle interpreted it as possible proof of its peculiarities with respect to air.
150 See E, ll.xxiit.23, 308: ‘that Hypothesis, how ingeniously soever explained, by shewing, that the parts of sensible Bodies are held together, by the preassure of other external insensible Bodies, reaches not the parts of the Aether it self; and by how much the more evident it proves, that the parts of other Bodies are held together, by the external pressure of the Aether, and can have no other conceivable cause of their cohesion and union, by so much the more it leaves us in the dark, concerning the cohesion of the pans of the Corpuscles of the Aether it self. The word ’ingenious’ is ambivalent, at once conveying respect for the pedigree of the author of the hypothesis while at the same lime implying cleverness in combining ideas rather than veracity. 151
151 See Anstey, John Locke, 106-8.
125
ignorance of the internal constitution of matter. An ethereal matter holding the various parts of bodies and of the universe together was an incognita as much as the phenomena which it was intended to explain.
‘Metcora*. which had appeared only in Scheme 1, reappeared in Scheme 4 after ‘Aer\ the second element: its addition was symptomatic of Locke’s increasing interest in atmospheric phenomena, clearly attested by a list of topics he penned in 1682 entitled ‘The Titles of the Natural and Experimentall History of ye Air’.152 The list was reminiscent of the method Boyle adopted to structure several of his works, including his posthumous General History of the Air to which Locke, whose interest in meteorology was closely linked to Boyle’s research in this field, contributed significantly.
After the fourth element, ‘Aqua’, several topics were added in Scheme 4, respectively ‘Oceanus’, ‘Fluvii’, ‘ffontes’, ‘Thermae’ and ‘Acidulae’. None of these was in Scheme 2; in Scheme 1, Locke had mentioned only ‘Mare’. ‘Oceanus’ recalled Locke’s keen interest in transoceanic voyages and explorations,153 but also Toinard’s inquiries concerning the possibility of sweetening sea water,5'4 and Locke’s interest in what Boyle had written on this subject (particularly his 1673’s Observations about the Saltness of the Sea, where he dealt with the preparation of fresh water
1is Bod!. MS Locke c. 42A, pp. 16-17.
153 This inter«! was well attested by the correspondence with Toinard: see Toinard’s letter to Locke of March 5, 1681 (Corrit, 387), where the former spoke of the voyage of the Admiral Sir John Narbrough to the Strait of Magellan (1669-1671); Toinard to Locke. July 16, 1681 (ii, 423), where he reported on the translation of Jean Stays’ book on Siam (1676) into French. Locke sent Toinard a report written by the traveler Robert Knox on the island of Ceylon: see Locke to Toinard, Aug. 30, 1681, (ii, 437). The list of travel books in Locke’s library is very substantia!: see LIL, Appendix V, 307-8. 154 *
154 Toinard bad devised a machine capable of cooking food in a bain-marie of sea water, which he thought could be of great help to ship’s crews: see Toinard to Locke,
Dec. 4, 1680, Corr., ii, 295-96. In a journal entry for Dec. 5, 1678, Locke reported that, according to Toinard, ‘the secret to sweeten salt water’ had been discovered: see
Dcwhurst, John Locke, 148.1 jxke added the name of John Wilkins, followed by ?
126
from sea water by distillation).155
As for ‘Thermae’ and ‘Acidulae’, both related to Locke’s interest in medicine and chemistry. Several works in his library concerned or mentioned mineral water,156 which according to Boyle ‘whether Acidula, as those of the German Spaw, our Tunbridge, &c., or Thermae, such as those of Bath, &c., tho’ but natural medicines, are, some of them, by being outwardly administered, known, singly, and in their native simplicity, to cure several diseases’.157 158 *
After ‘Terra’ Locke reintroduced ‘Geographia’, which was already in Scheme 1 but had been deleted in Scheme 2. Geography represented one of Locke’s constant interests, faithfully recorded by his library as well as by his correspondence with Toinard: the mention of the French astronomer Picard and of his telescopic observations, aiming at collecting reliable longitudinal data in order to redesign the chart of France, was frequent in the letters they exchanged in the years 1679-81,
Toinard was also an important source of information for Locke on botany.179 However, there was no trace of this in Scheme 4
155 In 1683, Boyle addressed a letter on this subject to the Royal Society; see R. E. W. Maddison, ‘Studies in the Life of Robert Boyle, F. R. S., Part II: Salt Water Freshened’, Notes and Records of the Royal Society of London 9 (1952): 196-216.
156 See UL, nos. 1651b (Laguna), 740 (Claudini), 930 (Dean), 1585 (Jorden), 658 (Chapman), 1407a (de Heer), 1251 (Le Ciivre), 352 (Blonde!); a work on this subject by Samuel Cotterau du Clos, whom Locke met in France in 1678, is also to be found in his library (UL, no. 789), as well as two works by the Flelmontian William Simpson (UL, nos. 2684 and 2685).
157 Robert Boyle, The Notion of Specific Remedies Prov’d agreeable to Mechanical Philosophy (1686), in Works, iii, 592. See UL, ¡to. 468.
158 See for instance Toinard to Locke, Aug. 16, 1679, Corr., ii, 64.
155 See Dewhurst, John Locke, 150, 151, 177; Lough, Locke's Travels, 256; Toinard to Locke, May 31, 1681, Corr., ii, 401; also July 25, 1687, hi, 228; July 16, 1688, iii, 481. Occasionally, Toinard benefited from Locke’s competence as a botanist: see Toinard to Locke, Aug. 28,1680, ii, 232, where he asked for some cochlearia seeds Mid some potatoes cultivated in London. Locke also sent some seeds to botanists in Montpellier when he returned to England (see Locke to Toinard. Feb. 20, 1681, ti, 380).
127
under ‘ Vegeta bilia' as in the previous schemes. As for ‘Animaba’, the list of topics collected under this subheading included respectively ‘Gressilia’, ‘Serpentia’, ‘Reptilia’, ‘Insects’, ‘Volucres’, 'Aquatics' and ‘Amphybia’. The only variation with respect to Scheme 2 was the addition of ‘Reptilia’, which had been deleted in the latter. 160 In Charleton’s Onomásticon Zoicon, reptiles were not among the species considered.
Locke's correspondence with Toinard might have been a possible source of inspiration in this case too. In 1679-81, the latter reported to Locke on the discovery of new species of animals in remote lands, including the ‘quirquinchos’ of Chile, a new species described by the Jesuit Alonso de Ovalle, which Locke would mention in the Essay.m. The quirquincho bore some similarities to reptiles as regards its external armour, a detail which Locke might have noted. (This is only a hypothesis).
What may be more significant is the recurrence of the Biblical number seven in the classification of 1681. Seven are the species of animals listed, as well as the sciences mentioned in the classification (respectively ‘Metaphysica’, ‘Theologia’, ‘Politia’, ‘Prudentia’, ‘Historia’, ‘Physica’ and ‘Semiótica’, according to their numeration). Seven are also the subheadings of Theologia, as well as those listed under Physica (‘Mundus sive Universum’, ‘Coelum’, ‘Vegetabilia’, ‘Animalia’, ‘Homo’, ‘Corpus humanus’ and ‘Sensus’).'6'1 This might not be casual: a growing interest in theology' (in particular, in Puritan theology) is visible in the
160 On Sept. 9, 1679 (Corrii, 85), Toinard reported to I/jcke on the discovery of two new species of animals, the “Quirquinchos” of Chile described by the Jesuit Alonso de Ovalle and the “Biscachas" of Tucuman, Later, Toinard reported on the “Zambuigi”, the Cape hunting dog living in Angola (Oct. 4, 1681, ¡hi, II, 442). On Aug. 27, 1678 {¡hi, L 606), Toinard had already spoken to Locke of "Empacaces”, a kind of buffalo found in Angola descri bed by Andrew Battel.
141 E HLvi.9, 445.
'** The seven subheadings are much more easily recognizable in the classification in 'Adversaria 1661’, pp. 290 91 (the draft for Scheme 4), which was penned by Locke. Scheme 4 was copied by his amanuensis Sylvester Brounower.
128
classification.
No significant change occurred in the list of topics under ‘Amina’, where the only novelty was the allocation of ‘Imaginatio’, which in Scheme 2 was written on the same line as ‘Perceptio’, below the latter, as a separate faculty. This modification recalled the content of some journal notes written by Locke in 1677-78, where he devoted special attention to the disorders of imagination: in Scheme 4 he clearly intended to emphasize the distance between perception and imagination, which had also been insisted on by Descartes in the Meditations. Nothing had changed under the subheading ‘Corpus humanum’, whereas some adjustments had been made under ‘Sensus’: after ‘Extensio. Geometria’, another topic, ‘Architectura’ was added with its three subdivisions, ‘Militaris’, ‘Civilis’ and ‘Navalis’. Yet again Locke’s correspondence with Toinard could have been a possible source of inspiration: in 1679, the latter had recommended one of his inventions to Locke, a ship with three keels, asking him to find a buyer in England. He had also reported on some interesting works on ships.164
‘Pondus’, which in the previous schemes was one of the objects of mechanics alongside gravity, did not appear in Scheme 4. Locke had finally resolved to adopt the new scientific terminology, according to which mechanics was the science of motion, not of weight.
A new topic, ‘Lux Optica’, was added under ‘Sensus’, before ‘Colores’. In 1670-72, Newton had delivered several lectures concerning optics at Cambridge, sustaining his new, antiperipatetic theory of light—a topic which he had been
163 Locke, ‘Madnesse’, 5 Nov. 1677, in Dewhurst, John Locke. 89; ‘Madnesse Folly’, Nov. 11,1677, in. An Early Draft, 98.
,M0n May 24, 1679 {Corrii, 21), Toinard asked Locke to contact Sir William Petty, who had devised some experimental ships; Toinard's ship was an improvement of one devised by Pitt. See also die note for July 4, 1678 in Lough, Locke 's Travels, 198- 99, where Locke reported on what Toinard had told him about a book by a “Mr. Gravier”, concerning the building and equipping of ships. Locke and Toinard continued to touch on the matter in their correspondence in subsequent years.
129
investigating since 1666—and introducing his mathematical theory of colours as an example of the value of mathematics in natural philosophy. 165 An article reporting on Newton’s experiments had appeared in Philosophical Transactions at the beginning of 1671,m and Locke was probably aware of Newton’s optical works from his numerous contacts with the members of the Royal Society.367 However, it is more probable that, in introducing light and optics in Scheme 4, Locke was thinking of the recent discoveries made by the Danish astronomer Olaus Renier, to whom he had been introduced in Paris by Toinard.
In 1677, Remer had been able to establish the speed of light through his telescopic observations of the satellites of Jupiter, as was faithfully reported in the Demonstration he published both in the Journal des Sçavants and in the Philosophical Transactions.1^ Locke admired Rentier's optical devices, as his correspondence and journal reveal;169 he brought one with him when, in April 1679, he left France to return to England.
The intense correspondence with Toinard, who acted as an intermediary between Locke and his new French acquaintances, but also some meetings with Boyle, seems to have left a deep impression on Scheme 4: this was no longer conceived uniquely
,c'' See Optical papers of Isaac Newton, volt: The optical lectures 1670-72, ed. A. Shapiro (Cambridge, 1984).
*“ ‘A Letter of Mr. Isaac Newton...containing his new theory about Light and Colours', Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London 6 (1671): 3075-
3087.
147 See G. A. I. Rogers, ‘Locke, Newton and the Enlightenment’, Vistas in Astronomy 22 (1978): 471-76.
‘u O. C. R«mcr, ‘Démonstration Touchant le Mouvement de la Lumière Trouvé par M. Rômer de l’Académie Royale des Sciences’, Journal des Sçavants (1676): 233-36; ‘A Demonstration Concerning the Motion of the Light, Communicated from Paris, in the Journal des Sçavants, and Here Made English’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London 12 (1677): 893-94.
m in a letter to Toinard of May 1679 (Carr., it, 11), Locke mentioned Romer and One of his inventions, a telescope whose workings he described in a journal note for March 28,1679 (though, Locke's Travels, 282).
130
as a map of studies but also as a sort of diary recording Locke and his acquaintances’ scientific experiences. The different treatment which Physica received in Scheme 5 revealed the influence of a different milieu, Holland, where he resided from 1683 to 1689, It also revealed a new object of imitation and emulation on Locke’s part, Alsted’s Encyclopaedia.
2.5 Scheme 5. Physica in MS Locke c. 28, fos. 155-56 and the ‘Division of the Sciences’ in the Essay
The last classification which Locke wrote before the ‘Division of the Sciences’ in the Essay was an extremely tormented one, as the presence of several deletions indicates. It dates to c. 1687,170 The classification contained the outlines of only two disciplines, respectively Physica and IlpaKxiKfj. This was the first time that physics had occupied the first place in Locke’s classifications, which is evidence of the new epistemic status he was conferring on it. Other important evidence confirmed this: the heading Physica was placed at the top of the first page (f,155r), and was followed by a list of five disciplines each marked by a number, respectively £1 Theologia’, ‘2 TrvsupaxiKii’, ‘3 ofopariicq’, ‘4 ApibpexiKTj’ and ‘5 ysopsrpia’. Pneumatics was a term frequently used by seventeenth-century Reformed theologians to identify the science concerning spiritual entities such as angels; m both theology and pneumatics therefore referred to incorporeal beings. Physica, then, was no longer conceived uniquely as the science of material bodies, as in the previous schemes. The corporeal and spiritual domains were both included in its subject.
170 On the basts of similarities in size of sheets and layout, Schuumnan argues that If. 155-156 were written immediately after “Of Ethtck in General” (if. 145-52} and probably also date from cct. 1686-1687. See Digital Locke project. Text descriptions, available from: http;//www,libraries.psuxdWtas/loeke/ indes.htinPjca. A reference to Essay, IV, xxiii, 20 appeared at the Lop of F. ISSr; the manuscript im written by Locke,
1/1 See J. Musselius, Disputatio pmumatica de cmgelographia (Wittenberg. 1625); J. SeharOus, Pmumatica hoc est scientia Spiritmtm Natitmlis (Wittenberg. 1629); J. Prideaux, Hypomnemata logica, rhetorica, physica, mettiphysiea, pimmattca, ethtm, politico, oecommica (Oxford, 1650).
The scheme of Zmpaxua), the third discipline in the list, was introduced below this with its eight subheadings: ' PYpcwokoyia’, ‘2°Acpovo|j.ia!, 172 ‘3°Atmosphaerica in qua meteorologia', ‘4° Hydrographia’, *5°Geographia’, ‘6° Fossilia’, ‘7° Vegetabilia', and ‘8° Animalia’. The subheadings were the result of several deletions. On the following page (155v), too, many deletions appeared. The scheme of ZcottauKt'j terminated on p. 156r, where that of npajctacf} began.
Zimarna) covered the field of physica special is, as was shown by its subheadings; the content of physica generalis was therefore to be identified with that of the other disciplines listed on f. 155r, theology, pneumatics, arithmetic and geometry. These were all theoretical sciences. Their location below the head Physica suggests that Locke was thinking of physica generalis as a speculative science encompassing all these disciplines.
There are some striking resemblances between the list of disciplines at the beginning of Scheme 5 and the list of theoretical sciences in Johann Alsted’s Encyclopaedia septem tomis distincta (1630), the most famous and influential seventeenth-century writing of this genre. The Enclyclopaedia was divided into thirty-five books, to which thirty-eight tables were premised; in table XXXII, where theoretical disciplines were listed, Alsted introduced respectively metaphysics, pneumatics, physics and mathematics, which were all treated in the fourth tome with their ancillary disciplines. The list was almost identical to that in
Acpovojuu is an error for ‘AcTpovoi.ua; YpavoXoyia should be Oupavucfj. The absence of proper diacritics is, again, evidence of Locke’s conceiving of the scheme as something for private use; J follow Locke’s spelling faithfully.
1 n A Cal vinist theologian, Alsted was the author of several works, mostly printed at Herhom, showing Ramist influences embedded with other elements such as milienarism and kabbalism (Clovis artis luttianae, 1609; Panacea phllosophica, 1610; Metciphysica, tribus ¡¡brim tractate, 1613; Methodus admirandorum mathematlcarum, 1613; Theoiogia natural'is, 1615; Cursus philosophici encyclopaedia, 1620; Theologia camurn exhibens anatomen conscientiae et scholam tentatlonum, 1621; Encyclopaedia septem tomis distincta, 1630; Adnotationes in Pentateuchum, 1631;; Rudimenta linguae latinae, 1634; Prodramus religionis triumphanth, 1635; and Scientiarum omnium encydopaediae, ] 649 (a reworking of the Enclyclopaedia of 1630 in four volumes).
132
Scheme 5: Alsted mentioned metaphysics in first place and physics in third, whereas Locke introduced respectively theology and qcopaxiKrj. The list in Scheme 5 terminated with arithmetic and geometry; Alsted introduced ‘Mathematica’, which included ‘Arithmetica’, ‘Geometria’, ‘Uranometria’, ‘Geographia’, ‘Optica’ and ‘Musica’, The third, fourth and fifth were included by Locke under ZcopaxtKrj.
In the thirteen book of the fourth tome of the Encyclopaedia, devoted to Physica, Alsted divided the latter into eight parts:
1) Physica generalis\
2) ‘Uranologia’ or doctrina de coelo\
3) ‘Meteorologia’, intended as the first branch of ‘Mictologia’ (the doctrine of mixed bodies);
4) ‘Nerterologia’ or the doctrine of minerals;
5) ‘Phytologia’, the first branch of the doctrine of animated bodies (‘Empsychologia’);
6) ‘Zoologia’ (the doctrine concerning animals in genere); ‘Therologia* (the study of irrational animals) and ‘Antropologia’ (the doctrine of man);
7) ‘Physiognomia’ (the doctrine of those signa explaining natural bodies);
174
8) ‘Cosmologia’ or doctrina de mimdo.
Locke mentioned eight subheadings under Zcopauictj; the first one, ‘Ypavokoyta’, corresponded to Alsted’s ‘Uranologia’. In the Encyclopaedia, ‘Uranologia’ or ‘Uranometria’ represented the scientia sphaerae coelestis including both ‘Astronomia’ and ‘Astrologia’.17' In Scheme 5, Locke introduced astronomy after
174 In Table xxxii, Alsted listed all the various branches of physics together: ‘Physica generalis’, ‘Uranologia’ or ‘doctrina eoeli’; ‘Somatoiogia*; ‘Stoecheioiogia’ or ‘historia elementorum’; ‘Mictologia' or the study of mixed bodies; ‘Meteorologia’; ‘Oryctologia’ or the study of fossils, to which ‘Lithologia’ and ‘Metallographia’ were linked; ‘Botanica’; ‘Zoologia’ and the annexed ‘Therologia’, or the study of the various species of animals; ‘Anatomla’, ‘Sphigmologia’, ‘Pathologta’ and ’Physica’, ail relating to medicine; ‘Omithologia’, Ichtiologia’, ‘Bucolica’ or the study of brutes, ‘Antropologia’ and ‘Cosmologia’, 177
177 Alsted, Encyclopaedia, tome ill, b, xvli, pars 2, eh, 1, 689, ‘Uranometria’ was the third of the mathematical disciplines listed in table XXXJ1, after ‘Arithmetica' and ‘Geometria’.
133
I*'
C”
i
I
'YpavoXoyux'. ‘Atmosphaerica in qua meteorologia’, the third subheading under EcouaxiKi), corresponded to the third part of Physica in the Encyclopaedia, including meteorology. 76 The other subheadings did not have an immediate correspondence to the subsequent parts of physics in the Encyclopaedia. Locke had preferred not to depart too much from the Aristotelian model he had followed in his previous schemes, which was still visible in spite of die different terminology he had adopted. I will return to EoniaziKrj and its subheadings later; for now, I will focus on the list of theoretical disciplines at the beginning of Scheme 5 to allow die differences with Alsted’s list emerge in detail.
As has already been said, Alsted mentioned metaphysics in the first place, whereas Locke chose theology; however, in Some Thoughts concerning Education he would speak of metaphysics as the first part of physics, concerning the study of the nature and properties of spirits.1' Clearly, Locke had changed his manner of conceiving metaphysics and its location in the system of sciences over time. In the classification written in 1681 Metaphysica was the first of the various branches of knowledge, being placed before Theologia fin conformity with Suarez’s teaching), whereas in the classification of 1687 and in the ‘Division of the Sciences’ at the end of the Essay metaphysics was not mentioned. In Some Thoughts it reappeared but in a subordinate position and with a content radically different with respect to the one which it had had in the classification of 1681 (the science inquiring into ens commune and its predicates).
The influence of William Ames, and puritan theology more generally, was probably at the root of these changes. This influence was already visible in the classification of 1681 with
Alsted, Encyclopaedia, tome IV, b. xiii, pars. 3, ch. 1, 700, and ch. 8, 704.
1 Locke, Some Thoughts, §190, 244-45: 'Natural Philosophy being the Knowledge of the Principles, Properties, and Operations of Things, as they are in themselves, I imagine there are Two Parts of it, one comprehending Spirits, with their Nature and Qualities: and the other Bodies, The first of these is usually referr’d to Metaphysicks: But under what Title soever the consideration of Spirits comes, I think it ought to go before the study of Matter and Body’.
134
reference to Theologia, which was divided into two parts, speculative and practical. This distinction conformed to the teaching of Reformed theologians such as Amandus Polanus and Ames,178 whose treatises included a section dealing with doctrine and another with practice. They usually defined theology as a practical discipline in contrast with purely speculative sciences, following Ramus’s teaching.179 Ames criticised the distinction between practical and speculative disciplines, and stigmatized metaphysics as vana et inutile: the differentiation between theology intended as the discipline investigating divine things through revelation, and metaphysics intended as the discipline inquiring into this same subject through the lumen naturale, was erroneous to his mind. Everything which could be known through natural light was known through revelation.180 Metaphysics was a redundant discipline, for there was no ground for any distinction between a natural and supernatural doctrine of God; the matters it inquired into could be adequately discussed in theology, logic, mathematics, or physics.
The priority which Locke attributed to Metaphysica in the classification of 1681, a priority which, nonetheless, gave him some difficulty,181 suggests he was following Ames’s teaching only with reference to theology; the absence of metaphysics from the list of theoretical sciences in Scheme 5 showed he had
178 Locke possessed Polanus's Partitions theohgicae (Basle, 1601: UL, 2366.) and Ames’s Declaration of ye Witnesses of Cod (London, 1681: UL, 84); he might have bought only those works which he could not easily find in Christ Church Library.
m In his Cammentariorum de Religions Christiana (Frankfurt, 1576), Petrus Ramus defined theology as ‘the doctrine of living well'; his disdain for Aristotle was particularly apparent in the area of ethics, in his view, the ethics of the Bible owed nothing to Aristotle’s ethics (cf. Ramus, Oratio de Professiom Uberatium artium, Paris. 1563).
180 See William Ames, ‘Disputatio Theologies adversus metapbysieam’, in Philosophemata, thesis 7, 111; compare, in the same volume, Tee/mometrki, »112, 32. 131
131 In ‘Adversaria 166!’, fos. 290-91 Theologia preceded Metaphyiscn. though it was numbered ‘2’ and metaphysics ‘I’; only in MS Locke c. 28, fos. 157-58 did Metaphysica come before Theologia
135
i
é
C
t -
g.
s
reconsidered what role to attribute to the discipline in the light of Ames’s criticism. The presence of Theologia in Scheme 5, as well as the absence of metaphysics, might be symptomatic of Locke’s intention to emphasize the superiority of divine revelation with respect to natural light. Ames’ teaching, but also Locke’s burgeoning intellectual relationship with the Remostrant theologian Philippus van Limborch (an opponent of Spinozism)IS" during Ills stay in Holland, might have played a relevant role in this regard. Alternatively, we might suppose that the theology introduced in Scheme 5 was natural theology, a hypothesis to which I will return in due course below.
In Some Thoughts, Locke declared that other names could substitute for the term Metaphysica (another symptom of his dissatisfaction with it). He might have been thinking of Pneumatica, the second discipline listed under Physica in Scheme 5, after Theologia. In his Encyclopaedia, Alsted characterized pneumatics as the scientia de natura spiritus; he defined it as a disciplina philosophica inquiring into the nature of particular spiritual entities (God, angels and anima separata), and distinguished it from metaphysics (the science investigating the ens generalissimus).liU Alsted’s pneumatics was the science to which Locke was probably alluding in the ‘Division of the Sciences’ at the end of the Essay, where he referred to the knowledge of God, angels and souls as a subject pertaining to Physica; the preference he accorded to the term ‘metaphysics’ in Some Thoughts might simply be a concession to the prepossessions of the audience for which it was destined.
As regards aoipaTitcrj, the third topic in the list on p. 155r, the term somatica was sometimes used as synonymous with physica in Locke’s time, as was the case in Stephen Chauvin’s Lexicon
l’" Sec Philippas vim Limborch, Theologia Christiana ad praxin pietatis ac promot'mnsm pack chrktianae unice directa (Amsterdam, 1686), where Spinoza’s view on miracles was criticized.
!8JAJsted, Encyclopaedia, tome IV, b. xi, pars I, ch. 1, 631.
136
rationale which appeared in Rotterdam in 1692.184 The Huguenot savant Chauvin immigrated to Rotterdam in 1685; Locke spent most of his time in Rotterdam from 1683 to 1689, lodging with Benjamin Furly (whose sympathies with dissenters and refugees are well documented, as in his correspondence with Locke).18'
The Lexicon’s terminology was not, however, a source of Scheme 5, Locke did not use the terms Physica and Ztopazncr} as perfect synonyms, for the latter corresponded only to physica specialis in his scheme: he wished to distinguish between Physica intended as a broad theoretical discipline, and Zaipameij, corresponding to one of its branches. A new concept of physica generalis, encompassing incorporeal beings, emerged from the inclusion of theology and pneumatics in the list at the beginning of Scheme 5. This was essentially what Alsted had affirmed in his Enclyclopaedia: ‘‘Physica universalis, sett generalis, late snmto vocabulo, est rerum naturalium scientia, sive illae incorporeae sint, sive corporeae: stride, est scientia corporis natural is in
1 RA ±
genere'. In the first, broad sense, physica generalis was to be conceived of as the science concerning those principles and affections which were common to both spirits and natural bodies, that is as a discipline including both pneumatica specialis (the discipline investigating the nature of created and uncreated spirits) and physica specialise likewise [Alsted had continued] physica specialis should be divided into pneumatologia, or
ls‘1 See Stephen Chauvin, Lexicon rationale sive thesaurus phUosaphicus (Rotterdam, 1692; 1713*). Chauvin divided theoretical philosophy into 'Pneumatica'. ‘Somatica’ or physics, and ‘Ontosophia’ or metaphysics; pneumatics, the science concerning spirits, was sub-divided into Theologia’, ‘Angelographia’ and ‘Psychologia’. See ibid., s.v. ‘Philosophia’. Chauvin's terminology was not new, stemming from Otto Casmann.
1,5 The second edition of Chauvin’s Lexicon showed his appreciation of Locke’s Essay, under the entry for ‘Cognitio’, Chauvin added a two-column summary of Locke’s Essay (‘Anglus quidam vir illustris’) to the explanation of the Scholastic and Cartesian theories of knowledge (Chauvin, Lexicon philosophicttm, s.v. 'Cognirio', 113 14).
18(1 Alsted, Encyclopaedia, tome IV, b. xii, pars 2, eh.2, 642. Italics in the text
scientiü spirítus, and somatologia, or sdentici corporis. Hence, somatologia corresponded in the Encyclopaedia to the investigation of substantia corporea; Locke preferred the Greek term affipaxtxfj, but the idea was the same. The object of Physica was to be conceived of as extending beyond corporeal things, so as to include spirits (a subject pertaining to Ideologia in Locke’s previous classifications); physica generalis was to be intended as the speculative part of physics inquiring into the nature, constitution and properties of both material and spiritual entities. We may now better understand why the list of topics located at the very end of the last adversaria, D, was probably added later, perhaps at the time in which Locke was composing Scheme 5: various topics in the list (such as ‘Spiritum’ and ‘Mira’) referred to incorporeal beings as objects to be considered by ‘Histórica Physica’. The list also incorporated two terms, ‘Oupavika’ and ‘Hydrographica’, which reappeared in Scheme 5 under I'ojpo.TiKij.
Locke’s evident knowledge of the Encyclopaedia might have its roots in a prior knowledge of Ames’s writings: the interest in Puritan theology manifest in the classification of 1681 might have led Locke to investigate the Encyclopaedia, which had powerfully influenced Ames’s Technometria. Both Ames’s technologia (the theory or study of art) and Alsted’s (the doctrina de proprietatibus, ordine et numero disciplinarum) represented a development of Ramus’s technology (the art of properly arranging the contents of the curriculum);187 the four praecognita omnium disciplinarum which Alsted introduced in the first tome of his Encyclopaedia as the respective objects of ‘Hexilogia’, 'Technologia’, ‘Archeologia’ and ‘Didáctica’ reappeared in Ames’s Technometria. Besides, both Alsted and Ames insisted
1,1 On the term 'technology' see C. H. Lohr, ‘“Technologia”: the Calvinist Theory of Science in the Reinassancc’, in G. Piaia (ed.j, La presenza del!’aristotelismo padovano nella filosofia detta prima modernità (Rome, 2002), 123-32; K. L. Sprunger, ‘Technometria. A Prologue to Puritan Theology’, Journal of the History of Ideai 29 (1968): 115-22. **
** See Ames, Technometria, §90, 86. Chi the relationship between Ames and Alsted, see L. W. Gibbs’s Introduction to Technometry, (Philadelphia, 1979), 30ff.
on the unity of all knowledge: the Encyclopaedia was conceived of as the systema omnium systematum, the Technometria as the instrument to acquire Pamophia, i.e. the knowledge of the ends of the arts intended as a cognitio emanating from God and returning to him in the form of eupraxiam Several other aspects too, such as the importance attributed to didactics and mechanical arts, were shared in common by Alsted and Ames’s works. Alsted in particular published a considerable number of works, with the purpose of reforming early modem scholarship and education. He was Comenius’s teacher at Herbom and strongly contributed to shaping his project of educational reform, a subject on which Locke reflected deeply during his time in Holland. Besides, Alsted’s Enclyclopaedia influenced Comenius’s pansophic ideal of a unique sapientia reconciling the various branches of knowledge, a ‘Christiana Philosophia’ conceived of as a viva universi imago. Comenius invoked the Biblical commonplace that God had ordered the world according to number, measure, and weight to herald a pansophic encyclopedia, which would unite natural philosophy and theology.''10 The list of disciplines which Locke grouped under Physica in Scheme 5 seemed to be inspired by this same ideal, going beyond the barriers of the scholastic ordo scientiarum.
Locke’s attention might have been caught by Alsted's Encyclopedia when he was in Rotterdam hosted by Benjamin Furly. The latter’s library contained two w'orks by Alsted, one of
189Ames, Technometria. §89, 85. Ames defined eupraxia as regulam agenda. in agendo motus (Technometria, §13, 6). Eupraxia was she end of ali disciplines, not only of the practical ones; the distinction between practical and theoretical disciplines was criticized in §88, 26. Ames’s enumerated six basic arts, corresponding to six kinds of eupraxia and six aspects of human existence: logic, grammar, rhetoric, mathematics, physics and theology. They represented the various links of a circular chain, starting with the comprehension of the individual arts and terminating in God. 90
l90Cf. J. A. Comenius, Pansophiae Prodromic. In quo admiranda Mika dt tere incomparahiUs Opería, Necessities. Posaibiliha. Utiiitas, solide, perspiem, sS degpmter demonstrate {London, 1639), see. 40. Locke possessed Comentas** Phystcae ad turnen divinum reformative synopsis (UL, no. 819b), as well as various editions of his Jama Imguurum [UL, nos. 817-19a).
139
which echoed the contents of the Encyclopaedia in some respects. 191 Furly himself came into close contact with Pansophism,1'*2 Locke’s friendship with Mercurius van Helmont, and his sharing the latter’s interest in Kabbalah and millenarism are further elements to be considered, given the importance of Aisled "s work on these topics.193
All this being said, it is also possible that it was Boyle who introduced Locke to the Encyclopaedia, which he probably possessed and with which he was surely well acquainted. In his New Pneumatica! Experiments about Respiration (1670), Boyle had characterized void as ‘absence of common air’, so as to deprive it of any ontological status. This conceptual move enabled him to skirt what he considered to be the dangerous
^ See Bibliotheca Furiiana sive Catalogus Librarian honoratissìmi et doctissimi Viri Benjamin Furly (Rotterdam, 1714), no. 14, 97, which refers to Alsted’s Lexicon Theologicim (Hannover, 1620) and no. 170, 253, which refers to his Methodus admirandontm mathematicourum {Herbom, 1641). The various sections of the Meihodtts (Mathematica generatis, Arithmetica, Geometria, Cosmographia, Uranoscopia, Geographia, Optica, Musica, Architectonica) recall the internal divisions of die Encyclopedia.
19_ Forty's library showed his interest in the work of German mystics, including Jacob Boehme and Francis Mercurius van Helmont; through van Helmont, Furly came into contact with the mystical German theologian Christian Knorr von Rosenroth, the author of Kabbaia Denudata. The latter was the leading figure of a pansophical- kabbalistic group in the court of Count Christian August von Pfalz-Sulzbach, that regarded the reconciliation of the Kabbalah with the Christian dogma as its primary duty. Rosenroth published his Kabbaia with the hope of advancing universal knowledge; a letter from him to Locke concerning the Abregé of the Essay is to be found in Corr., iii, 399-405, and was probably given to Locke by van Helmont. Among Locke’s papers there are notes (entitled ‘Cabalia [ 16188~ (Bodl. H&L, 558)) on chapter 3 of Rosenroth’s Adumbratio Kabbalae Christianae, issued in 1684; another paper, ‘Lexicon Syneatabasis 7 88’ (Bodl. MS. Locke c. 27, ff. 79-80), contains the definitions of terms taken from Rosenroth's Adumbraiio. On Locke and van Helmont, see A. P. Coudert, ‘John Locke and Francis Mercurius van Helmont’, in Everything Connects: In Conference with Richard H. Pophin: Essays in His Honor, ed. J. E. Force and D. S. Katz (Leiden, 1999), 87-113.
’"See Alsted’s Diatriba de mille annis apocalypticis, non il Us Chiliastarum & Phantastarum, sed B B. Daniel is & Johannis (Frankfurt, 1627). Locke took some notes regarding millenarism from Helmont's writings. See John Marshall, John Locke: Resistance, Religion and Responsibility (Cambridge, 1994), 601-2.
140
theological implications of giving a non-material entity, such as More’s Spirit of Nature, an absolute existence. The interpretation of void as privation was in Alsted’s Encyclopaedia™ though of course Boyle departed from Alsted’s denial of its existence. There is evidence that Boyle took some quotations from the book, which was probably in his library.m Boyle might have shown the Encyclopaedia to Locke several years before the composition of Scheme 5, yet it seems not to have exerted a peculiar influence on his previous classifications; it may be that Locke returned to Alsted’s work at a moment in which his interest in theology had grown significantly, influencing also his manner of conceiving physics. A fully materialistic understanding of the latter’s object appeared inadequate when he was penning Scheme J; the Encyclopaedia was a fruitful source for devising an alternative, pansophic type of physics.
Let us go back to the scheme of Empower}, where some similarities between Locke and Alsted’s divisions of physics have already been noted. The scheme was also evidence of important differences from that model. Alsted’s terminology was not always attractive to Locke. The Encyclopaedia, for instance, contained the term ‘Botanica’, whereas Locke preferred ‘Vegetabilia’ which was common in translations of Aristotle. Alsted used the term ‘Zoologia’, whereas Locke preferred ‘Animalia’, though he had initially written ‘ZiooLoyia’ (the sixth part of Physica in Alsted’s Enclyclopaedia, and the sixth subheading under Eeopamaj in Scheme 5).
After uranology, astronomy and meteorology, Locke introduced ‘Hydrographia’ and ‘Geographia’, respectively the
1,4Alsted, Encyclopaedia, tome TV, bk. 13, pars 1, ch. 11, sec, 8,682.
195 Sec The Early Essays and Elides of Robert Boyle, ed. J. T. Harwood (Edwardsville, II, 1991), xxii; M. Hunter, ‘How Boyle Became a Scientist’, History cf Science 33 (1995): 78; J. E. Jenkins, ‘Arguing about Nothing: Henry More and Robert Boyle on the Theological Implications of die Void’, in Rethinking the Scientific Revolution, ed. Margaret J, Osier (Cambridge, 2000), 177-80.
141
fourth and fifth subheading under ZmpanKty, Alsted considered ‘Geographia' as one of the mathematical disciplines, and ‘Hydrographia’ as one of his branches. Some deletions reveal that Locke had initially written ‘Geographia’ before ‘Hydrographia’, but he had subsequently inverted them so as to respect the order of the four elements: the Aristotelian model to which his previous schemes of Physica conformed was only partially abandoned in Scheme 5, confirming Locke’s somewhat conservative attitude towards that framework.
The sixth subheading, ‘Fossilia’, substituted the deleted ‘Ztookoyta’; both ‘Fossilia’ and the subsequent subheading, ‘Vegetabilia’, were accompanied by some items in faint handwriting. The topics pertaining to the first were respectively ‘Metalla’, ‘Semimetalla’, ‘Sales’, ‘Sued concreti’, ‘Lapides’ and ‘Bob’; those pertaining to ‘Vegetabilia’ were ‘Arbores’, ‘Fructices’ and ‘Herba’. The same items reappeared on the following page (f. 155v), where several of them had been deleted: probably Locke had initially written them there and later added them to the previous page. The eighth subheading under ZwfiariKij, ‘Animalia’, substituted the deleted ‘Mineralia Fossilia ZojoXoyia autouaia’,19“ which Locke had all written on a same line (the penultimate of p. 155r). Minerals, fossils, animals and plants w ere usually treated together in sixteenth- and seventeenth- century books on mineralogy (those by Aldrovandus and Gessner, for instance); their repetition (for they had been already introduced as separate subheadings) suggested Locke was seriously perplexed about the way of ordering the object of physica specials. He was unsatisfied both with Alsted’s innovative model and with the older Aristotelian model; the latter seemed however to have exerted a residual influence, as shown by the subsequent page of the scheme (155r).
As for auTopaxa, the term recalled Descartes’s view of animals as simple machines, without cogitatio and souls. Locke’s account of idiots in the second book of the Essay was bound up
The proper diacritics (afatyam) again are absent.
142
with contemporary debates about the status of animals, which were particularly heated in France; the author at the centre of the French debate, the Jesuit scientist Ignace Gaston Pardies,m rejected Cartesian automatism, claiming that animals had some aptitude for reason but that humans alone were able to exercise the higher operations of the mind. Locke mentioned Pardies i n his notebooks, but where the latter identified these higher operations with innate common ideas, Locke took an empirical approach. In the Essay, his final word on the place of brutes on the scale of beings was that they were not able to abstract; the allocation of “auxopara” after ‘Zcookoyia’ in Scheme 5 clearly highlighted Locke’s rejection of Descartes’s view.
At the top of f.l55v, Locke reintroduced the subheading ‘Animalia’ followed by the names of four species, respectively ‘Aquatilia’, ‘Volucres’, ‘Reptilia’ and ‘Quadrupides’. ‘Insecta’ and ‘Amphybia’, which were in the previous schemes, were not cited. The presence of several deletions seemed to indicate Locke was uncertain about the best order and terminology to adopt: ‘Animalia’ was preceded by the deleted ‘ZcaoXoyia’, already present on the previous page. ‘Volucres’, which was also in Schemes 2 and 4, substituted the deleted ‘Volatilia’; ‘Quadrupidia’ and ‘Aquatilia’ substituted respectively the deleted ‘gressilia’, which was in all the previous schemes, and ‘Natantia’, which was only in Scheme l. The order of the species, too, w as different with respect to the other schemes, being inspired by the account of the creation in Genesis (water creatures and birds on the fifth day; creeping animals and other terrestrial animals on the sixth day). What remained constant was Locke’s refusal of the dichotomy between terrestrial and aquatic animals, already apparent in his earlier schemes.
‘Homo’ was not one of the subheadings. The various topics listed under it in the previous schemes, most of which referred to the faculties of the mind, were not cited, ‘Homo’ was included
1,71. G. Tardies, Discours eh la cotmoisstmee ties bates (Paris, 1672: UL, no, 2193).
143
■
under ‘Animalia’ on f. 155v, both as the first of the various species, and as the last of them. In the first occurrence, the tenu had been deleted: probably Locke had initially thought of dividing animals into rational and irrational, as in several Aristotelian classifications,148 but he preferred to follow the account of Genesis (man as the last of the created species), which bespeaks once more the attention he devoted to theology in Scheme 5.
After ‘Animalia’, Locke had written, and then deleted, “Vegetabilia5 with its three species, respectively ‘Arbores", Tructices’ and ‘Herba’ (which were also on p. 155r, where they had probably been copied after having been written on f. 155v).199 The three species represented tire classic divisions of botany, which could be traced back to Theophrastus and were still widely used in the seventeenth century'. This was the first time that something had been added under ‘Vegetabilia’ in Locke’s schemes of Physica. In 1686, Jean Le Clerc had asked him to review John Ray’s Historia plantarum (1686), knowing of his interest in botany.200 The addition might be linked to this episode.
The work of Ray, which marked an important step towards modem botanic taxonomy, was well known to Locke, as was the theological perspective which supported it. A Cambridge natural historian and divine, Ray perceived clear evidence of supernatural order in the intricate adaptations of plants and animals to their environments; he was one of the preeminent exponents of the English natural theology tradition together with Richard Bentley, William Derham and William Whiston. They all intended to provide support for the argument from design through the
Aisled divided animals into irrational (‘Bcstia’) and rational (‘Homo’): see Encyclopaedia, tome IV, b. 13, pt, vi, ch.3, 745. ‘Therologia’ preceded ‘Antropologia’.
”” The many deletions on f. 155v suggested Locke might have used it as a draft.
The review was published anonymously in Bibliothèque universelle et historique 3 (1686), 1-17. Regarding its attribution to Locke, see Rosalie Colie, 'John Locke in the Republic of Letters', in Britain and the Netherlands, ed, J. S. Bromley and R, H, Kossmann (London, I960), 111-29.
144
scientific investigation of nature. This was the focus of the annual series of Lectures promoted in Boyle’s name from 1691, which had to render manifest how the ‘Book of nature’ could prove and teach the tenets of Christianity. 201 Newton’s famous
pronouncement in the second edition of his Principia Mathematica (1713), as well as his (fractious) correspondence with Bentley in the early 1690s, went in this same direction: the order manifest everywhere in the universe was clear proof of the existence of a creator and of his design. The theology which Locke introduced in the list on f. 155r might have been conceived by him as the natural theology hymned by Boyle in the Christian Virtuoso-}02 a ‘true natural theology’203 for Boyle should include an investigation of the ‘pneumatical world’ and make use of the whole sphere of ‘experience’, both natural and supernatural,'04 If the theology in Scheme 5 was only natural, revealed theology was left out of the scheme. The exclusion of theology from the ‘Division of the Sciences’ at the end of the Essay might have been anticipated in this way in Scheme 5.
After ‘Vegetabilia’, Locke rewrote ‘Fossilia’ with the various topics which followed it on the previous page. He had initially written ‘Mineralia’ instead of ‘Fossilia’, but had then deleted it: ‘Mineralia’ had been rewritten after ‘Semi metalla’, as synonymous with it. ‘Semi metalla’ was a term also used by Boyle to identify those ‘fossils’ which, ‘though of affinity to
201 The English physico-theology movement was given a public forum in the Boyle Lectures founded in 1692; the most influential published Boyle Lectures in natural theology were those delivered by William Derham in 1711 and 1712, published as Physico-Theology in 1713. There were several works by Ray in Locke’s library; sec UL, no. 2444-2447.
202 According to Anstey, die notes in MS. Locke c. 27, tbs. 67-68, entitled ‘Boyle, Observations on his Treatise 8T. would refer to a manuscript draft of The Christian Virtuoso, published in 1691. See Anstey, 'The Christian virtuoso and John I.ocke', in. On the Boyle 2 (1998): 5-7. Therefore, Locke would have known the work before its publication,
203 Boyle, The Christian Virtuoso. Appendix to the First Part„ in Works, vi, 705-6.
20,1 Boyle, The Christian Virtuoso. Second Pari, in H’orfa, vi, 751.
145
metals, are wont to be distinguished from true metalline ores’.205 ‘Minerals’ was a term frequently used by Boyle, sometimes to encompass all inorganic bodies apart from metals, sometimes as synonymous with ‘Fossilia’.206 Locke’s hesitation to abandon the old term ‘Fossilia’, which since Agricoia had been used to refer to all inorganic bodies, is symptomatic of his linguistic caution: a passage in the “Advertisement to the Reader” which he wrote for Boyle’s General History of the Air showed he considered ‘mineral’ as a term in need of clarification when intended, as Boyle sometimes did, as an equivalent for ‘Fossilia’.
The six topics listed under ‘Fossilia’ did not exactly correspond to the various species of fossils catalogued in sixteenth and seventeenth-century books on mineralogy, deeply influenced by Agricola. Following Dioscoride, Agricola introduced four species of fossils, respectively ‘Terrae’, ‘Succi concreti’, ‘Lapides’ and ‘Metalla’, a division which also Cardano and Falloppio had adopted. In his Musaeum metallicum, Aldrovandus preferred a different ordering, ‘Metalla’, ‘Terrae’, ‘Succi concreti’ and ‘Lapides’, which he considered as more Aristotelian, for metals were the most known and used species of fossils. In his Epitome, Sennert introduced five species, respectively earth, salt, bitumen and sulphur, stones and metals; the six species Locke mentioned in Scheme 5, as well as their order, seemed to refer to a different, more advanced model. They recalled those which Herman Boerhaave would introduce in his Elementa Chemiae,208 namely ‘Metalla’, ‘Salia’, ‘Sulphurea’,
305 Boyle, A Previous Hydrostatical Way of Estimating Ores, in Works, v, 493.
■w'See for instance Boyle, The Sceptical Chymist, in Works, i, 487: ‘fire is not a universal analyzer of all rrtixt bodies,...of metals and minerals’; Of the Umuccettsfulttess of Experiments, in Works, i, 322: ‘minerals of differing kinds, as marehasites and metals’.
*J7 See Boyle, The General History of the Air, in Works, v, 610: ‘under the title of mineral substances are comprehended earth, and all other fossils, to avoid multiplying of articles'.
2m See Boerhaave, Elementa chemiae, quae annrversario labore docuil, in pttblicis, prlvatkque, scholis, Hermannm Boerhaave (2 vols., Leiden, 1732).
146
‘Lapides’, ‘Terrae’ and ‘Semimetalla’. On p, 155v of Scheme 5, Locke had initially written, and then deleted, ‘Terrae’ instead of ‘Bob’ (which in the Elements would be mentioned as a species of medicinal earth).209 The similarity with Boerhaave’s ordering is suggestive. He was active in Leiden, one of the towns which Locke visited during his stay in Holland;3 211'0 the wide scientific milieu with which he came into contact during his exile, the same milieu in which Boerhaave’s ideas germinated, might have exerted some influence on him, though the different cataloguing of fossils in chap, viii of the Elements (‘earth, stones, metals, minerals and other fossils’), if it was Locke’s work, is more reminiscent of Agricola’s classifications and may show that this influence did not last.
There was no mention of ‘Sensus’, the last subheading in Locke’s previous schemes. Some of the topics collected under it in those schemes were listed at the bottom of f. 155v and at the top of f. 156r. Each was marked by a number: ‘1 Motus’, ‘2° Visus Lux Colores optica tinctoria [perspectiva deleted] gotica’, ‘3° Auditus Soni’, ‘4° Gustus Sapores’, ‘5° Olfactus Gdores’. Touch and tactile qualities were not cited. ‘Motus’ was separated from ‘Mechanica’. Its allocation before sense objects suggested it might refer to those ‘Motions of our Spirits, or Alterations of our Bodies’ by which, Locke affirmed in the Essay, ‘we come to have any Sensation by our Organs, or any Ideas in our Understandings’.212 ‘Perspectiva’ might be a reference to Baroque perspective tools such as the anamorphosis, of which he spoke in the Essay when considering the causes of confused ideas;" L' also
209 Locke, Elements, 428. In Boyle’s Specimen els Gsmmarnm origins et virmtihtts (1680), 56, boli were characterized as ‘mineralia apertae texturae’,
210 See Woolhouse, Locke, 203.
211 Locke, Elements, 428.
3,2 E Li.2, 43.
211 E II.xxix.8, 365 66. The anamorphosis required the viewer to use special devices to reconstitute the image; Locke introduced the example of a drought and a eylindric mirror.
‘gotica’ might refer to Baroque art (and in particular to Baroque architecture, as with the ‘props and buttresses’ mentioned in the Essa\>).‘Medicina’, ‘Veterinaria’, and ‘Mechanica’ concluded the outline of EamaziKjj; ‘Veterinaria’, which was already in some of the adversaria, recalled Locke’s interest in husbandry as well as one of his activities during his stay in Holland, the rearing of sheep215.
The first datum which emerges from a comparison between the content of physica specials in Scheme 5 and the previous schemes is the substitution, or attempted substitution, of the various subheadings which organised the latter with something else. The Aristotelian divisions of physics were replaced by the names of the corresponding sciences: uranology and astronomy substituted respectively ‘Mundus sive Universum’ and ‘Coelum’; the four elements were replaced by ‘Atmosphaerica’, ‘Hydrographia’ and ‘Geographia’; an attempt to replace ‘Animalia’ with ‘Zcookoyia’ was visible. The many readjustments under Smpawaj showed Locke’s dissatisfaction with the Aristotelian model, and his desire to render justice to the specificity and autonomy acquired by various scientific disciplines. ‘Sensus’ was not present, probably because of the impossibility' of substituting the term with the name of one single science; ‘Corpus Humanum’ was replaced by ‘Medicina’. No mention was made of its branches: their absence, as well as that of other minor topics (such as tactile qualities), suggested Locke was more concerned with revising the general architecture of physica specialis than with its single items. The difficulties he encountered in this attempt were apparent, given the many deletions: Locke was probably dissatisfied with the scheme,
214 E Liv.25, 102: ‘But in the future part of this Discourse, designing to raise an Edifice uniform, and consistent with it seif,..I hope, to erect it on such a Basis, that I shall not need to shore it up with props and buttresses, leaning on borrowed or begg’d foundations'. *
*J'Locke donated some of his sheep to Edward Clarke: see Con., iii, 351, His library included several almanacs, a precious source of information for husbandry (see IJL, Appendix V, 292, s.v. ‘Almanacs’).
148
which represented a sort of compromise between the old and the new. This might explain why he did not develop the content of (pvauaj in the ‘Division of the Sciences’ at the end of the Essay into more detailed schemes: he might have still been wrestling with how to systematise the contents of physica special is properly.
The classification of 1687 seemed to have been a preparatory scheme for the ‘Division of the Sciences’, which included respectively tpvmtaj, IJpaKziKtj and gtjpicoziKp. Physica occupied the first place, as in Scheme 5, and was characterized as a speculative science. Its object was described as follows:
The Knowledge of Things, as they are in their own proper Beings, their Constitutions, Properties, and Operations, whereby I mean not only Matter, and Body, but Spirits also, which have their proper Natures, Constitutions, and Operations as well as Bodies. This in a little more enlarged Sense of the Word, I call (pvaiKp or natural Philosophy. The end of this, is bare speculative Truth, and whatsoever can afford the Mind of Man any such, falls under this branch, whether it be God himself, Angels Spirits, Bodies, or any of their Affections, as Number, and Figure, etc.
This passage shed further light on the elaborate architecture of Scheme 5: (pvaiKrj was to be conceived of in a ‘more enlarged sense’, that is to say as synonymous with the new physica generalis devised in Scheme 5, including pneumatica. Locke’s earlier schemes of physics reflected his endorsement of Boyle’s mechanism and his materialistic understanding of bodies; in particular, Scheme 2 revealed the great authority which he conferred on Boyle in determining the content of physica generalis. Scheme 5 might still appear more or less coherent with Boyle’s teachings in the Christian Virtuoso: Boyle was familiar with pansophism and was deeply influenced by Comenius’s ideals of universal learning during his life. ~10 However, the
2,6 The inclusion of a letter by Benjamin Worsley to Ilartlib in Boyle's General History of the Air confirmed this; the letter concerned the celestial influences on the earth (as well as on the souls of mixed bodies, including men's souls). Besides, in a typically Comenian fashion Worslcy pointed out that astrology, alchemy, medicine and
attribution of bodies to spiritual beings in the ‘Division of the sciences’ suggests another influence, that of Platonism: it was More, arguing against Descartes, who had insisted that God had to be somehow extended in order to communicate motion to matter. In The Immortality of the Soul, More affirmed that God’s supreme perfection implied his omnipresence and ubiquity, which could only be conceived of as an extended ‘Divine Amplitude’.217 This should not, More continued, be confused with bodily extension, for extended bodies were divisible and penetrable, whereas God and finite minds were indivisible and impenetrable. Following More, Newton insisted that every being, including God and the created minds, could not exist if not related to space in some way. Similarly, in the Essay Locke declared that God ‘fills Immensity’, and that it was an excess of materialism (and dogmatism) to believe that ‘where there is no Body, there is nothing’/19
Like More, Locke was careful to insist that, though extended, God was not material. In correspondence with Limborch in 1697, he recurred to More’s argument of God’s ubiquity in space to demonstrate His uniqueness.220. Clearly, he had changed his mind with respect to the past: the materialistic understanding of bodies which Scheme 1 highlighted, perhaps in direct opposition to
theology were closely connected: probably Boyle agreed with him. See A. Clericuzio, ‘New Light on Benjamin Worsiey’s Natural Philosophy’, in Samuel Hartlib and Universal Reformation: Studies in intellectual Communication, ed. M. Greengrass, M, Leslie, and T. Raylor {Cambridge, 1994), 236-46.
: Hairy More, The Immortality of the Soul (Dordrecht, 1987), 33.
' ’Newton, De gravitatione, in A. Janiak ed., Newton: Philosophical Writings, (Cambridge, 2004), 25. See also the discussion of space and time in the Scholium to the Principia, and the discussion of God in the General Scholium added to the 1713 edition of the Principia.
2,,EII, xv, 3, 197.
~'s‘.the combined influence of More and Newton was apparent in Locke’s correspondence with Limborch of ¡697, where he introduced the notion of God’s omnipresence in pure space. See Carr., vi, appendix II, 783-87.
More’s notion of a Spirit of Nature, had been overcome by a Morean understanding of extension, one implicit in the content of physica generalis in Scheme 5, An important role in this regard might have been played by the Platonism of Damaris Cudworth, or by Locke’s Hollandish acquaintances,221 or even by Newton (though Locke met him only in 1689). However, the anti- Cartesian view of space which emerged from the journal note of 16 September 1677 suggests that Locke was already rethinking his concept of extension in those years.222
Theology was not mentioned in the ‘Division of the Sciences’: at the time of writing the Essay, Locke had become convinced that its object ranged far beyond the various sciences, even beyond the natural theology of Scheme 5. A scheme of Theologia he wrote in 1694223 highlighted how much relevance he attributed to a physico-theological investigation of nature, for it included topics (‘Materia’, ‘Homo’ and ‘Sistema nostrum’) pertaining to Physica in the previous classifications.224 It also incorporated ‘Ethica’, which was in keeping with Locke's intention to bring together all the various sciences into a single one, and ‘Revelatio’, which was evidence of his including both natural and revealed theology. In Of the Conduct of Understanding, Locke emphasized the priority of theology' with respect to the other sciences—it was ‘incomparably above all the rest’—insisting on
321 See V, Nuovo, ‘Reflections on Locke's Platonism’, in Christianity, Antiquity anti Enlightenment: Interpretations of Locke (Dordrecht, 2011). 163-ISO.
233 See note 141 above.
323 ‘Adversaria Theologica 94’, ff, 1-7, printed in Victor Nuovo (ed.), John Locke: Writings on Religion (Oxford, 2002), 21-33.
324 In a letter to Lim botch, Locke remarked on the importance of approaching difficult theological questions ‘physically’: see Locke to Limborch, 29 October 1697, Corr., vi, 783-87); the theological question the latter was inquiring into, concerning the way to prove God’s uniqueness, could be better approached for Locke in physical terms: ‘the mind must be raised to a somewhat higher level and separated from the ordinary manner of philosophizing if anyone wants to prove it philosophically or, if 1 may speak thus, physically’.
its all-encompassing nature as well as on the significant contribution which it offered to broadening man’s understanding:
This is that noble study which is every mans duty and every one that can be called a rational creature is capable of. The workes of nature and the words of die Revelation display it to mankind© in Characters soe large and visible that those who are not quite blind may in them read and see the first principles and most necessary parts of it and from thence as they have time helps and industry' may be inabled to goe on to the more abstruse parts of it and penetrate into those infinite depths filld with the treasures of wisdome and knowledg. This is that Science which would truly enlarge mens minds were it studyed or permitted to be studyed every where with that freedom, love of truth and charity which it teaches, and were not made contrary to its
225
nature the occasion of strife faction, malignity and narrow impositions.
The pansophism sketched in Scheme 5 found its complete formulation in the Conduct. For among the benefits deriving from the study of theology would be a better understanding of the secret workings of nature.
§3. Conclusion
Locke might have conceived his schemes of Physica as maps of his own studies, yet they surely represented more than this. The schemes progressively became a sort of diary where he noted down his experiences and interests, as well as an instrument for rethinking the content and scope of natural philosophy. The Aristotelian model, and the worldview to which it gave form, represented an important legacy which Locke, as many of his contemporaries, had deeply absorbed. This model was still only partially abandoned in Scheme 5. The theoretical nature which he attributed to physics in the latter and in the Essay, which was obscured in the earlier classification by the location of Physica after practical sciences, illustrated the recovery of the fundamental premise of that model, the idea of scientia as
Sec Locke, Of the Conduct of the Understanding, ed. P, Schuurman (University of Keek, 2000), §23, 193.
152
deductive-demonstrative knowledge distinct from that obtainable through the empirical observation of nature. However, the privileged position attributed to Physica as the first of the various sciences in the Essay seemed to contrast with Locke’s pessimism regarding the possibility of natural philosophy obtaining the status of a science. This contrast may be softened when considering that the Aristotelian ideal of a demonstrative knowledge served to mark the distance between the hypothetical knowledge obtainable through experiment and observation and the certain knowledge obtainable through a new, pansophic physics which did not rely exclusively on materialistic premises. Physics, intended as the science of material bodies, could not achieve the status of a science, Locke declared in the Essay, for it was impossible to obtain a certain, demonstrable knowledge of the nature of things. The Essay highlighted the contradiction between atomistic philosophy and certain knowledge: the mechanical worldview purported to explain all natural phenomena by the size, shape and motion of invisible particles of matter, yet these particles were not amenable to direct observation. Therefore physics was necessarily hypothetical. It was questionable whether certainty and explanation could be achieved by natural philosophy.
However, the Essay also indicated the way of overcoming this contradiction: the objects of physics should not be understood exclusively in materialistic terms. The many hypotheses which Boyle advanced in his Cosmical Qualities regarding the action of ‘unheeded agents’ (but also the ‘heteroclite effluviums’ he spoke of in his Suspicions about some hidden qualities in the air of 1674)226 might have played an important role in Locke’s
226 In the Suspicions, Boyle argued that the air might contain several effluvia, sane of which originating from the subterranean regions of the earth and some from celestial bodies. These effluvia diffused in the air had something in common with the spirits which, according to his coSlegue Ralph Bathurst and others (Worsley, for instance), pervaded the universe as a sort of tmima rnt/ndi, Boyle had rejected this Platonic notion in his New Experiments (1660), yet his works illustrate thsit the investigation of the spirit never disappeared from his agenda. See A. Clerictmo, 'The internal laboratory. The chemical reinterpretation of medical spirits in England (1650-1680)’, in Alchemy
rethinking the object of physics in broader terms. Boyle’s natural theology and More’s notion of a spiritual extension, but also Locke’s inquiries into Puritan theology and pansophic writings, might have all contributed significantly in this regard. The new physica general is which he introduced both in Scheme 5 and in the Essay was a manifesto against materialism.
The support which physics could afford to theology was apparent to Locke, as it was to Boyle, Newton and other sustained of a natural theology. The inverse was also time for Locke, as the outline of Theologia of 1694 showed. An attentive study of the Scriptures could disclose the purposiveness of the ’Creation of the material World, of this visible Frame, of Sun, Moon, and Stars, and heavenly Bodies that are over us, and of the Earth we inhabit’.2“' It revealed that ‘there are both animal and spiritual bodies’, of which ‘the spiritual was not the first but the animal’, and that the first man, Adam, was made of ‘earthy particles’.'28 The intelligible truth of the Scriptures, and in particular of Revelation, was the solid ground on which physics could base its inquiries.
Gabriele D ’Annunzio University of Chieti-Pescara
and Chemistry in the 16th and 17th Centuries, ed. P. Rattaiisi and A. Clericuzio (Dordrecht, 1994), 53-58.
John Locke, A Paraphrase and Notes on the Epistles of St, Paul, ed. Arthur W. Wainwright (2 vols., Oxford, 2003), ii, 64In.
Locke, Paraphrase, i, 254.
154
Appendices Scheme 1
‘Adversaria 1661 fos.1-2, MS Film 77 (c. 1670).
[f. 2v] Materia
Extensio et Numerus
Motus
Universum
Coelestia
Ignis
Aer
Aqua
Terrestria
Fossilia
Vegetabilia
Animalin
Homo
Anima
Corpus humaiium
Sensus
f "ri lontitiM' 9&TIEB rtTtltn
iLläjua
TTTXTtLID
Geometria et Arithmetica
Mechanica
Mundus Creatio
Astronomia
Meteora
Mare
Geographia Physica
bisecta. Volatilia Gressilia, natantia
Intellectus volutas passiones quae pertinete etiam possum ad Theologiam
Medecina. Anatomia sive hist, partium. Pathologia sive historia affectium, et Therapeutiea sive hist. Curationum
Objecta sensuum Numerus Arithmetica
Extensio Geometria
Motus. Gravitas pondus mechanica
Colores pictoria et tinctoria
Soni musica
Odores
Sopores Coquinaria Táctiles qualitates Calor frigus et de his omnibus artes tnechankae
sjtJjcsí:
155
Scheme 2
‘Sapientia 72’ (MS Locke c. 28, f. 41r-v), f. 41r
Physica
Mundus sive universum Materia Corpus
Coelestia
Astronomía
Ignis
A»
Aqua
Terra el íbssília >et fossilia Geographia Physiea Vegetabilia
Animalia
Anima brutorum
Gressilia serpentia reptilia insecta natnntia volotttia volucres nnionria aquatica anphybia
Homo
■Anima
Facúltales
Pereeptio Imaginario Memoria Intellectus Voluntas
Corpus humanum Medicina
Anatomía sive historia partium Palhologia sive historia affectuum Therapeutica sive hist. curationum
Senstts Objecta sensuum
Numerus Arithmetica Extensío Geometría Motus. Gravitas, pondus mechanica Colores, Ars pidona tinctoría etc.
Soni Música Odores
Sapores Coquinaria Táctiles qualitates. Calor frigus
156
A: MS Locke f. 15, pp. 119-120 (crossed out)
[p- 119]
Adversaria
Cognoscendoru[m] philosophies i. e. quicquideon-
ducere potest ad notitiam entiü[m] eorumq[ue| causarum proprietatum effectuum et consequentiarum ut sc eorum habeamus veras claras et destínelas Ideas. Quicquid hujus- modi occurrit destribuendum
in capita secundum varias rerüfm] — Species
[p. 120]
Adversaria Histórica physica. se. pro-
prietates et effectus cor: porum eorumq[ue] qualitatum qui ad usum vel cognitionem maxime spectant destri-
buenda in capita per --------- Species
Bonitas
Agendorum Immitanda
Physica sive artes quae in usufm] nostrum transferri
possimi circa
Cibum
potum
Medecinam
Veterinaria
motum sc.
Mechanica
sensuum objecta
Chimica
Sensus adjuvandos res eonservandas
pharmaceutics
vel meliorandas haec omnia *
Species
B: MS Locke c. 28, f. 50 r-v
[f. 5 Or]
Adversaria Ln Legendts Authoribus hace mihi praccipuc
observanda vidcntur.
Cognnscencíorum philosophìca i. e, Quicquid conducere possil ad notitiam entium eorumq[ue] causatimi pro- prictatum effecluum et consequenliamm ut se: eorum habeamus veras, claras et destinetas Ideas. Quicquid hujusmodi occurril destri buendum in Capita —
secundum varias rerum---------------------------
[f. 50v]
Adversaria Históricaphysica. In quibus proprsetates
et effectus corporum eorumqfue] qualitatum qui ad usum vel cognitio- nem maxime spectant destribuendi in capita per ---------------------------
Ethica Species Physica
Species
Bonitas
Agendomi;r ¡mmitanda
Physica sive artes quae in usum nostrum trans- ferri possunt circa
Cibum
Potum. Vestitum
Medecinam
Veterinaria
motum se.------------ Medianica
sensuum objeeta Sensus accudendos Res meliorandas vel conservandas
haee omnia per Species
158
Scheme 3
(M S Locke f.2, pp. 2 4 7 -5 2 , Sept. 4 1677)
tp. 248] Adversaria
The first of w[hi Jch is the knowiedg of things their essence & nature, properties causes & consequences of each species w[hi]ch I call philosophies & must be divided according to the severall orders & species of things. And of these soe far as we have the true notions of things as really they are in their in destine! beings, soe far we advance in real!
& true knowiedg. And this improvemt of our understandings Is to be got more by meditation then reading though that also be not to be neglected. And the faculty
chiefly exercisd about this the judgmt. [p. 251, heading Adversaria Immitanda]
Physica
ubi sive artes circa Potum Cibum Medecinam Motus ubi Mechanica
[p. 252]
Sensuum objecta
There is yet one more w[hi]ch is the knowiedg of the natu history of natural! causes & effects where in it may be convenient in our reading to observe those severall effects propertys of bodvs & the severall effects that severall bodys or their qualitvs have one upon another. & principally to remark those that may contribute either to the improvemt of arts or give light into the nature of things er wfhijch is that wfhijch I call about phiioso phiea w[hi]ch: I conceive to consist in having a true eleare & destined Idea of the nature of any thing inasmuch as vv[hi]ch in natural! things or reall beings usually because we are ignorant of their essence takes in their causes propertys & effects or as much of them as we can know, & then in Moral! beings their essence & consequences.
This natural l history 1 call
Histories physica. referenda secundum species
C: MS Locke f. 15, pp, 122-23
Adversaria
Cognoscendormn i.e.
philosopliica sc: quicquid conducere
possit ad notitiam entium eorumqfuej
causa rum, proprielatum effectuum
et consequentiarum ut sc: eorum
habeamus veras claras et destinctas
ideas, quicquid hujusmodi occurrit
destribuendum in Capita secundum Etliica
varias rerum Species------------------- Physica
lP-123]
Histórica physica in quibus Proprietates et effectus corporum eorumq[ue] quaiitatum. qui ad usum vel cognitionem máxime spectant per---
Indicia vel nota bonitatis cuiusqtue] rei prout usui nostro sotó inservire
Species
Bonitas
Agendorum
Immitanda
Physica sive artes quae in usum nostrum transferri possum circa----------------------------------
Cibum
Potum
Vestitum
motum sc.
Medecinam Pharmaceuticfam] Chimiam Veterinariam Meehan ica
Sensus acuendos Sensuum Objecta Res- - Conscrvandas Meliorandas aliaq[ue] — artes
160
D: MS Locke c. 28, f.51r-v
[f.51r|
Adversaria In legendis Aulhorihus haec mihi praecipue
12 Nov. 77 observando videntur
Io Cognoscendorum Philosophie» i,e,
Quicquid condueere possit ad ítolitiam entium philosophícam: Ut se. / de cortan essentüs causis effectibus veras, claras, et destinctas Ideas habeamus 1° quae sunt entis in Genere ut Metaphysica, 2o spec- ierum entis ut Physica / Quwqwéhuitasmodi oceurrit
3o quae pendent ex volúntate hominum ut Ethíca
[varios rerum----------- Species 3 Ethica
2 Physica Ì Metaphyssca
[f.51v] Histórica physica —
1° in quibus [>notitìa eorpomm eorumq(uej] proprietates et effectuu[m] qualitatum, quae ad usura vel cognitionem maxime spectant distribuenda
in capita per-------------Species
2° Notae et signa cuiusq[ue] rei suo in genere bonae et perfectae-------------------Bonitas
3° Agendorum — 1 Immitanda
2° Physica si ve artes soler tiam ut quae in usum nostrum rebusq[ue] nostris accomodar!
possint circa-------------------------- Cibum
Potum Vestitura Suppe! lectilem Medecinam Pharmaceuticam Chimiam Veterinariam motum ut Mechanìeam
Sensuum objecta Sensus acuendo* Res Conservandas mdìorandas Artes alias
161
3o Histórica physiea-----se. Rerum lneorporeorum —
1 ° omnia quae accidimt ultra
nostrani atmosphacram ut-------------
2o Quae eeeurrunt observando in
nostra atmosphaeria---------------------
3o lu mare fluminibus lacubusq[que]
4 De Terra----------------------------------------
5 In regno sensitivo
6 — ìntellectuali--------------------------
7 Vegetabili-------------------------------
S Subterránea-----------------------------
9 quicquid in quolibet honun praeter solitimi na[tur]ae cursum oeeurrit sive prodigium dicas
si ve miraculum--------------------------
Spiritum
Ottpavika
Meteorica
Ilydrographica
Geographica
Animalium
Hominum
Vegetabili uni
Kossilium
Mira
162
[p. 158r]
Pliysica Homo
Sch eme 4
M S Locke c. 28, pp. 157-58.
Mtindus Sive universum Materia corpus Vaccuum
Coelum Astronomia Chronologia
Aether
Ignis
Aer Meteora
Aqua Oceanus Fluvij ffontes Thermae Acidulae
Terra Geographia Fossilia
Anima rationalis
Facúltales
Perceptío
Imaginatio
Memoria
Intellectus
Voiuntas
Corpus humanum Medicina
Anatomía Sive historia partíum Pathologia Sive hist. affectuum Therapeutica Sive hist, curationum
Animalia
Sensus objecta sensuum Numeras Arithmetica
Mllílaris
Anima Brutorum
Extensio Geometría Architectura
Civilis
Gressilia,
Motus Gravitas Medianica
Hawaiis
Serpentia
Colores pietoria et tinctoria
Reptilia
Lux optica
Insecta
Volucres
Soni Musica Odores
Aquatica
Sapores. Coquinaria
Amphybia
[p. 15Sv] Táctiles qualitates. Calor frigus etc.
et quae in his occupantur Artes
Scherno 5
MS Locke c. 28, ff. 155-56.
lp. 155rj
Physiea
Io Theologia 2°avsun«Twdi 3%es(iatiK^
4sApi8ptyttKT)
5° yeopcTpta
Etúfiatuoí
i° YpavoXoyta 2° Agtovojna
3° Atmosphaerica in qua meteorologia 4° Geograph i n Hydrographia
6" Ztaokoytü Fossilia--------------------Metalla, Semimetalla, Sales
Y-' Herba
Muerai» Fossilia
Io Metalla
21 * Sales Semi metalla vel mineralia
3° Saies
4° Succi eonerfeti]
5® Lapides 6S Terree Boli
1 Motus
TJ Visus Lux
tinctoria
3° Auditus Soni
4° üuslus Sapores
Succi concreti, Lapides, Boli
T° Vegetabilia
Arbores, Fructices, Herba
S Animaba
[p. 1 S5v]
ZcaoLoym Animaba
Voulcres
Vegetabilia
-^■Arbores
164
5° O lfactu s odore s
Medicina
Veterinaria
Medianica
***
165

PETER ANSTEY ON LOCKE’S NATURAL PHILOSOPHY
Jonathan Craig Walmsley
Peter Anstey’s book John Locke on Natural Philosophy (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011) (henceforth JLNP), presented an interpretation of Locke’s work on science and medicine, andhow' this shaped his philosophical views. It was wide-ranging in scope and often impressively detailed. It raised a number of questions about Locke’s relationship to the work of J. B. van Helmont, his collaboration with Thomas Sydenham, and the overall chronology and trajectory of his natural philosophical interests. It also occasioned a number of questions about methodology in the history of philosophy and how we should construct an interpretation of a thinker like Locke from the published, manuscript and historical records available. Some of these questions were posed explicitly in a ‘Review Article’ in these pages.1
It is therefore very welcome that Anstey should address some of these questions in some ‘Further Reflections on Locke’s Medical Remains’, first presented as a conference paper,“ and now published in this journal."' This paper will address those answers that Anstey chose to provide, as well as some matters he chose to pass over, and conclude with a broader review of Anstey’s approach.
§1. Locke and van Helmont.
Locke studied medicine at Oxford from the late 1650s up until his
1 J. C. Walmsley, ‘Review Article; John Locke and Natural Philosophy', Locke Studies 12 (2012): 243-84.
1 Peter Anstey, ‘Citation and Allusion in Locke's Medical Remains’, read at the Journée d’étude “Empirisme et méthode dans les manuscripts médicaux de John Locke”, ENS de Lyon, 13 November 2014.
3 Peter Anstey, ‘Further Reflections on Locke’s Medical Remains’, Laeke Studies 15 (2015): 215-42.
departure for London in April 1667, to take up residence in the household of Lord Ashley. Perhaps one of the most interesting points to emerge from a detailed review of Locke’s natural philosophical career is how explicitly ‘Helmontian’ some of this early natural philosophical work appears to be.
Van Helmont was an avowedly ‘chymical’ thinker who posited a complex ontology to explain natural phenomena. He believed that all matter was derived from water and that ‘ferments’ impregnated different parts of water with ‘“seeds” by imposing an ‘image’ upon it. These seeds arranged matter from the water to match these images and transformed it into various irreducibly chymical elements—i.e. the nature of the elements was not dependent on the shape and size of their particles, but their intrinsic ‘chymical’ properties. For many chymists the fundamental elements were salt, sulphur and mercury. Helmont also believed that the body contained ‘Archei’—quasi-spiritual entities that governed the operation of different organs. In his time at Oxford, Locke read extensively in this tradition (amongst several others), undertook experimental work in ‘chymistry’ and physiology, and, in two works from 1666-67, ‘Morbus’ (on the nature of disease),4 and ‘Respirationis Usus’ (on the purpose of respiration).5 directly referred to Helmontian ferments and Archei as active agents in nature. Locke’s An Essay concerning Human Understanding (London 1690) is generally understood to express an austere mechanism, where impact is the only conceivable corporeal cause because impact is the only instance where we can see a physical cause bringing about its effect. For readers familiar with the mechanism of the Essay, these early non-mechanical views can come as something of a surprise.
4 British Library (henceforth BL), Add. MS 32554, pp, 232-33, 237, 246, 248-50. Transcribed in J. C, Waimsley, “Morbus’: Locke’s Early Essay on Disease’, Early Science and Medicine 5 (2000), 366-93, at 390-93.
’ National Archives (henceforth NA), PRO 30/24/47/2, ff. 71-74, Transcribed and translated in J. C, Waimsley and E. Meyer, ‘John Locke’s ‘Respirationis Usus': Text and Translation’, Eighteenth-Century Thought 4 (2008): 1-28.
But perhaps more surprising is Anstey’s assertion that Locke continued to adhere to some form of Helmontianism long after this initial early work in Oxford, This despite significant variations in circumstance, associates, interests, and, as we have noted, what appears to be a clear enunciation of an austere mechanism in the Essay, Locke’s most elaborate and polished philosophical work. Indeed, Anstey maintains that Locke was an Helmontian while simultaneously asserting that he rejected ‘speculative’ hypotheses, and maintained what Anstey calls a ‘corpuscular pessimism’—the attitude that it was impossible to know what was going on at the microscopic level and therefore pointless to speculate about it.
This raises a number of interesting questions. First, exactly what sort of Helmontianism does Anstey believe Locke maintained after his time at Oxford? How could it avoid being ‘speculative’ and positively optimistic about our ability to understand and make strong claims about the corpuscular realm? Second, exactly how long did this adherence to Helmontianism last? And third, what evidence supports these surprising claims? Let us consider these points in turn.
In respect of the first question, to exactly what sort of Helmontianism does Anstey think Locke adhered? Does Anstey believe that Locke believed that all matter was ultimately water? That seeds carrying images imposed themselves on this water to create matter with irreducibly chemical attributes? That the different parts of the body were indeed managed by ‘Archei.’? Which of these claims, if any, is Anstey making? And how could any of these claims be reconciled with the austere mechanism Locke enunciated in detail in the Essay? In his book, Anstey at one point asserts that Locke adhered to some sort of ‘de-vitalised’ Helmontianism,6 where mechanical explanations were given for ‘chymical’ phenomena. This, of course, begs the question of how ‘Helmontian’ such a view would be, since the vitalistie elements are the core of the theory: replace these with mechanism and you merely assert that Locke was an austere mechanist. But in the
4 A n stey , JLNP, 181.
book’s conclusion, Anstey throws such caution to the wind, leaves aside any caveats, and asserts that Locke favoured ‘various Helmontian conceptions’ (without specifying what these were).7
In his ‘Further Reflections’ on the subject, Anstey provides no further answer to this question. He gives no substantive account of which ‘Helmontian conceptions’ he maintains that Locke believed in—water, seeds, images, ferments, Archei. Without this explanation, it is hard to understand exactly what Anstey thinks Locke believed when he was writing the Essay. This appears to leave a fairly large hole in Anstey’s interpretation of Locke’s natural philosophy—Anstey does not present a substantive account of Locke’s views on the core natural philosophical question of how the world functions in Locke’s major philosophical work. Not to mention the fact that the view of material causation presented in the Essay appears to rule out anything other than impact on the primary qualities of bodies as a conceivable mode of physical agency (at least in the early editions, of which more later). It is difficult to subscribe to an interpretation without a clear articulation of what it is supposed to mean. It is more difficult still to subscribe to one that appears to entail something close to a contradiction, where Locke maintains that material causation can only be conceived to be mechanical and yet is simultaneously fundamentally non-mechanical, as Helmonf s theory held that it was.
But this appears to be what Anstey asks us to believe. Anstey recognises that some commentators might suppose that Helmontian theory and the austere mechanism Locke articulated in the Essay are not particularly comfortable bedfellows. He imagines such commentators would object that
Locke would not have countenanced explanations in terms of the operations of an archeus once he had committed himself to a corpuscular matter theory and to the efficacy of explanations by analogy with the functioning of machines.8
J Anstey, JLNP, 223.
* A n ste y , ‘F u rth e r R efle ctio n s’, 232.
170
Anstey takes the point, but does not attempt to reconcile the two theoretical outlooks, tacitly conceding that they are indeed incompatible. Instead he offers some obiter dicta about just how Locke might have been able to entertain these apparently contradictory views:
In my view., .in the case of the theory and practice of medicine, Locke had a higher tolerance for cognitive dissonance and we ought to look for Locke’s cast of mind, that is, the general characterization of his outlook, rather than to presume that he applied strict principles of logical consistency.9
Anstey asks us to suppose that Locke entertained views that he knew to be fundamentally inconsistent, and that he did this for the larger part of his adult life, while composing and publishing what is generally considered to be one of the most important philosophical works of the modem era.
Readers may find it more difficult to suppose that Locke outlined detailed arguments for an austere mechanism over the course of more than a decade,10 while simultaneously maintaining that nature worked in entirely extra-mechanical ways. Such a possibility might seem even more unlikely when we recall that, while the Essay contains repeated assertions that corporeal causation can only be conceived to operate by mechanical means, there is not a single instance of Locke referring to any element of Helmontian theory in any of these discussions. Nor does Locke make any reference to Helmontian theory in, for example, his correspondence with Stillingfleet, the drafts of additions to the later editions of the Essay, or in the Elements of Natural Philosophy.11
9 Anstey, ‘Further Reflections'. 232.
10 Walinsley, The Development of Locke's Mechanism in the Drafts of the Esstwf British Journal for the History of Philosophy 11 (2003); 417-40.
11 Though, as J, R. Milton has pointed out ('Locke and the Elements of .Natural Philosophy: Some Problems of Attribution’, Intellectual History Review 22 (2012); 199-219), some parts of the Elements could not have been written by Locke- The
171
Anstey wants us to believe that Locke maintained incompatible theories. Which brings us to the second question raised by Anstey "s ‘Further Reflections’ on this subject—for just how long does Anstey suppose that Locke maintained these inconsistencies? Anstey appears to believe that Locke was an Helmontian tor the whole of his adult life—from his time in Oxford to his death in 1704. Anstey starts by noting Locke’s references to Helmontian concepts in ‘Morbus’ and ‘Respirationis Usws’, citing them as part of the general intellectual climate of the time, and thus concepts that would have remained with him ceteris paribus:
It would only be natural, therefore, that his intellectual trajectory as a physician continued in this track, conceiving of disease and therapeutics in Helmontian terms. This would most likely continue until he encountered strong grounds for changing his basic theoretical orientation. There is no
yy
evidence, however, that such a change ever occurred.
This comment is odd, not least because in his book Anstey notes at least three major changes in Locke’s basic theoretical orientation after his time at Oxford.
In the first instance, and leaving aside the vexed question of ‘influence’, Anstey admits that Locke articulated his ‘corpuscular pessimism’ only after he had left Oxford.13 Two papers in Locke’s hand written in 1668 and 1669, ‘Anatomia’ and ‘De Arte Medica’ state that we will never be able to penetrate into the inner workings of nature, so it is simply pointless to theorise about them—and this same view was further articulated and expanded in the drafts and published editions of the Essay. Locke had never expressed views of this nature previously, and, indeed, his thinking in ‘Morbus’ and ‘Respirationis Usus’ assumed that you could make substantive claims about what was happening at the
question of how much of the work can be safely attributed to him, and how accurate a view of his thinking it provides, remains open.
n Anstey, ‘Further Reflections’, 234.
11 A n stey , JLNP, 3 1 -4 5 , arid 3 7 fo r th e date o f L o c k e 's first statem en t o f this view .
172
unobservable level. It is unclear how this adoption of‘corpuscular scepticism’ after Locke left Oxford could count as anything other than a major change in basic theoretical orientation.
The second basic change in theoretical orientation was Locke’s adoption of an austere mechanism,14 15 the origin of which Anstey dates to Draft B of the Essay from 1671 ,lD citing accounts of the evolution his views given by Lisa Downing and the present writer.16 17 18 Locke had never previously articulated the notion that the only corporeal cause we had an idea of was impact, and so that impact was therefore the only conceivable ¡/«observable corporeal cause. This too must count as a change in basic theoretical orientation—perhaps the most important change, since it led directly to Locke’s famous distinction between Primary and Secondary Qualities.
The third change in Locke’s theoretical outlook is perhaps the most telling in this context. Anstey notes that Newton’s work had a significant impact on Locke’s views on mechanism.' Regarding corporeal causation, in the first three editions of the Essay, Locke had asserted that:
The next thing to be consider’d, is how Bodies operate one upon another, and that is manifestly by impulse, and nothing else. It being impossible to conceive, that Body should operate on what it does not touch, (which is all
one as to imagine it can operate where it is not) or when it does touch,
IS
operate any other way than by Motion.
14 Anstey, JLNP, 19.
15 Anstey, JLNP, 44.
16 Anstey, JLNP, 19, n. 31.
17 Anstey, JLNP, 19, 154.
18 Locke, An Essay’ concerning Human Understanding, ed, Peter II. N idditch (Oxford, 1975, corrected reprint 1979). Henceforth Essay. References will cite Book, Chapter and Section number, or page number from this edition), ll.viii.il, ed. I, there are minor changes to eds. 2-3.
Edward Stillingfleet, Bishop of Worcester, criticised Locke’s views of thinking matter, asking how matter could have any form of Liberty (as a thinking thing might), since had Locke asserted that he could only conceive matter to act by impulse.19 Locke took tliis occasion to note that he had changed his view because Newton had demonstrated that there were indeed other ways that bodies could act:
Tis true, I say, ‘that Bodies operate by impulse and nothing else’. And so I thought when i writ it and yet can conceive no other way of their operation. But I am since convinced by the Judicious Mr. Newton's incomparable Book, that ’tis too bold a Presumption to limit God’s Power in this Point, by my narrow Conceptions. The gravitation of Matter towards Matter, by ways unconceivable to me, is not only a Demonstration that God can, if he pleases, put into Bodies, Powers, and ways of Operation, above what can be derived from our Idea of Body, or can be explained by what we know of Matter, but also an unquestionable and every where
visible Instance, that he has done so. And therefore in the next Edition of
20
my Book, 1 shall take care to have that Passage rectified.
Locke was as good as his word, reducing the passage in both length and scope in the next edition:
The next thing to be consider’d, is how Bodies produce Ideas in us, and that is manifestly by impulse, the only way which we can conceive Bodies operate in.'1
It is now only the production of ideas in us that is constrained by conceivability of mechanical interaction, not corporeal causation as a whole.22
'9 Edward Stillingfleet, The Bishop of Worcester’s Answer to Mr. Locke’s Letter (London 1697), 73.
John Locke, Mr. Locke's Reply to the Right Reverend the Lord Bishop of Worcester's Answer to his Second Letter (London 1699) (henceforth Second Reply), 408.
*' Locke, Essay, ILvíü.l 1 (4a ed. onwards).
J‘ Though, as Anstey points out (JLNP 154), Locke was less than thorough In making similar changes elsewhere in the Essay-..a failing also reflected in his less than
174
All of which raises a question of Anstey’s interpretation. If Locke was always committed to the view that there were nonmechanical corporeal causes, why would the appearance of Newton’s theory have made any difference to Locke’s general outlook? Why would he have thought it necessary to acknowledge that there were non-mechanical causes, and that he would have to change his Essay in recognition of this fact? On Anstey’s interpretation, Locke always believed there were nonmechanical causes—Newton’s theory would just have been another example of such a theory. Why wouldn’t Locke have simply ignored the inconsistency of Newton’s theory with the austere mechanism expressed in the Essay, as Anstey apparently believes Locke did with Helmont’s? Why didn’t Locke simply say something like the following: !I know I said impulse was the only conceivable corporeal cause, but 1 didn’t really mean it— despite what I appeared to say, I’ve always thought there were non-mechanical causes because I’ve always believed in Helmont’s theories, and now look! Newton’s shown there are other non-mechanical causes. Anyway, there’s no need for me to change the Essay, because I’ve always supposed there was nonmechanical natural agency’?
It would appear that Locke felt the need to acknowledge the impact of Newton on his arguments simply because he would not countenance the ‘cognitive dissonance’ that Anstey seems comfortable attributing to him. Locke recognised that Newton demonstrated that his assertions about the nature and scope of corporeal causation were inconsistent with the facts of universal gravitation, and adjusted his views accordingly.
Locke, then, seems not to have been all that keen on the type of ‘cognitive dissonance’ that Anstey ascribes to him. When it came to it he did not want to maintain two inconsistent positions. Whether Locke adjusted his views on this subject fast or far enough is an interesting question, but the fact is that he did adjust
systematic insertion of the phrase ‘determined* as a replacement for ‘eiear and distinct' as outlined in the 'Epistle to the Reader’ of the fourth edition of the Essav (Essay, tJ- 14).
his basic theoretical outlook once again in the light of Newton’s work. And he did so in a w-ay which shows that he would not simultaneously assert theories he knew to be mutually inconsistent. Why Anstey believes Locke held the Helmontian theory7 to a different standard is nowhere explained.
As Anstey himself evidences, Locke’s basic theoretical natural philosophical framework did change after he left Oxford, making it more likely that his views on Helmontian theory changed also. Which brings us to the third question raised by Anstey’s interpretation—what evidence is there that Locke maintained a life-long commitment to Helmontian theory? As noted above, there can be no doubt whatever that Locke did assent to Helmontian theory during his time at Oxford—‘Morbus’ and ‘Respiradonis Usus5 clearly adopt elements of that theoretical outlook. Since both pieces are relatively short, and since ‘Morbus’ in particular takes a reasonably eclectic view, it isn’t easy to provide a finally dispositive analysis of Locke’s matter theory' at this point in his career, but it is clear that Helmont’s thinking significantly informed Locke’s views. It is equally clear that Locke remained interested in the practice of ‘chymistry’ long after he left Oxford in 1667—as late as 1689, Locke still included an iron furnace in his luggage.23 But the issue here is what evidence there is that Locke subscribed to Helmontian theory, or, indeed, any non-mechanical theory of natural agency, from 1667 onwards? What evidence is there to support the view that Locke willingly maintained belief in a theory he knew to be inconsistent with the views he was drafting and then publishing in the Essay? Anstey' makes one general comment about Locke’s interest in chymistry, and then presents four items to support his case that Locke was Helmontian. He then attempts to neutralise a comment by Locke that might be seen as critical of Helmontian theory. Let us consider his general claim first.
Regarding ‘mercurial chymistry’, Anstey says ‘there is far more manuscript material pertaining to Locke’s mercurialist chymistry than there is published material pertaining to
n Bod I, MS Locke f. 10, 5,
176
corpuscularianism’. i am not quite sure what is being suggested here. First, it is not clear to me what Anstey means by the terms ‘mercurialist chymistry’ and ‘corpuscularianism’. It is absolutely true that Locke took copious notes on chymical experimentation both at Oxford and afterward—but these practical reports are generally not statements of belief in Helmontian or chymical theory. Moreover, the contrast Anstey makes between this ‘mercurialist chymistry’ and ‘corpuscularianism’ seems to imply some sort of opposition. Is ‘mercurial chymistry’ a nonmechanical theory of agency? By ‘corpuscularianism’ does Anstey mean the ‘austere mechanism’ of the Essay? Anstey would help the reader by providing more detail in his description. If that is the case, is Anstey then trying to elide Locke’s interest in the practice of chymistry with some non-mechanical theory of natural agency? Locke always retained a practical outlook, and was consistently interested in the practice of science, medicine, economics, politics and religion, even as his theoretical commitments changed over time. That Locke used the iron furnace from his luggage does not imply anything about how he believed it worked. Locke certainly did make numerous notes on his reading of chymical works, and on his own practical experimentation—but in itself that tells us little about what Locke believed about how all of this functioned. While at Oxford, Locke took scores of notes on the writings of the neo-Aristotelian Daniel Sennert, and apparently even structured one of his notebooks in accordance with Sennert’s theoretical framework,24 but that does not make Locke a neo-Aristotelian.
Moreover, it is not clear that Anstey’s claim is true as simple a matter of fact. The Essay contained numerous extended discussions of matters related to the internal constitution of objects—for example, those on primary and secondary qualities, substance, real and nominal essence, and so on—all of which were couched in terms of an austere mechanism, and all of which were published in multiple editions over several years. Thai was a lot of published words directly stating Locke’s views about 34
34 His notebook at the BibUoteca Marciana in Venice, shelfmark MS Lat. VU, 22,
177
natural agency, Anstey concedes that Locke never ‘published] anything on mercurial transmutational alchemy’,25 but then goes on to say ’That these ideas never appear in print is no indication that he did not subscribe to them”.26 But if Locke did subscribe to these non-mechanical views, why did he never say so in print, given the abundant opportunity he had to do so? And if he was concerned about publication, why did he not express such views in The Elements of Natural Philosophy, if it was indeed written
B -v * * ryi
by Locke for the private use of Francis Masham?“ Or in correspondence with his close confidants? Or, indeed, to anyone on any occasion? By far and away the most likely explanation would seem to be that Locke, while interested in the practice of chymistry, did not subscribe to any non-mechanical theory of chymical agency—what Anstey appears to mean by ‘mercurial transmutational alchemy’. That would plausibly explain why he never published anything. Is there some other explanation, silently presumed by Anstey’s interpretation, why Locke kept his lifelong belief in this theory a secret?
Let us now turn to the four instances which Anstey believes show ‘the nature, persistence and application of Locke’s Helmontian conception of disease’.28
1. In 1679 a physician named William Jacob wrote to Locke mentioning the actions of ‘ferments’, the treatment of which Locke noted in his journal.22
2. In 1684, when discussing the treatment of colic, Locke used the phrase ‘furente archaeo’ i.e. ‘the archeus being enraged’ in his note
25 Anstey, ‘Further Reflections’, 226.
16 Anstey, ‘Further Reflections’, 226-27.
27 Though see note 11 above.
28 Anstey, ‘Further Reflections’, 227.
29 Anstey, ‘Further Reflections’, 227, cf. William Jacob to Locke, c. 27 September 1680, Correspondence of John Locke (henceforth Corr.), Letter 576, vol. 2, 259-60; cf, Bodi. MS Locke f 4, 174-75.
178
3. In 1688, ‘Locke recorded some chymical receipts that interested him in his journal,.,chymical substances...integral to Helmontian medicine’.31
4. In 1692, ‘after Locke was appointed executor of Boyle’s chymical papers he came into possession of a crucial document for understanding the development of Boyle’s chyrmstry’, concerning the preparation of the volatile salt of tartar, one of the substances
3'?
‘integral to Helmontian medicine’.
This is all the evidence that Anstey presents for the assertion that Locke was an Helmontian throughout his career, and held fundamentally inconsistent views while drafting and publishing several editions of the Essay. 1, 2 and 4 are, at best, indications of interest in practical matters that may have had some Helmontian connection. They are by no means statements of Helmontian theory, and it is not even clear that Locke thought them particularly interesting because of any Helmontian association— chymical receipts for specific compounds would be interesting independent of their theoretical origins. So too prescriptions to treat particular ailments. And these are a small handful of notes among the hundreds that Locke made on such subjects throughout his career.
The reference to the archeus being enraged is certainly more suggestive—this does appear to be a direct reference to
on the subject.30
30 Anstey, ‘Further Reflections’, 22728, ef. Bodl. MS Locke f. 8, 214-15; transcribed in K. Dewhurst, John Locke: Physician and Philosopher (London, 1963), 262, and j. R, Milton, ‘Locke, medicine and the mechanical philosophy', British Journal for the History of Philosophy 9 (2001): 221-43, at 239.
31 Anstey, ‘Further Reflections’, 228, cf. Bodl. MS Locke f. 9, 322, translated in Dewhurst, John Locke, 279-80. 32
32 Anstey, ‘Further Reflections”, 228-29, cf. Newman and Principe, Alchemy Tried in the Fire: Starkey, Boyle, and the Fate of Helmontian Chymistry (Chicago 2002), 218. The document is found at Bodl, MS Locke c. 29,115r—1 ISv.
179
Helmontian theory. But Anstey seems unsure that this remark amounts to anything more than a manner of speaking. He says:
|T]he best way to approach this is to consider that given Locke’s earlier formation as a Helmontian physician it was only natural for the trajectory of his conception of disease to continue to deploy Helmontian categories, rather than, say. Galenic ones. '
He then goes on to draw a parallel with the Cartesian vortex theory of the time, Locke was well acquainted with Descartes’ theory^ of the vortex from his reading in Oxford. But Anstey does not appear to think that Locke subscribed to this theory:
Locke was becoming increasingly sceptical of Cartesian cosmological ideas throughout the 1680s, particularly after reviewing Newton’s Principia in the Bibliothèque universelle in 1688. Indeed, the salient feature of Locke's review is the manner in which he reproduces Newton’s
But, Anstey notes, Locke later made reference to the vortex theory despite his scepticism:
We...find Locke...in 1695, speaking in terms of vortices when describing the progress of the young Francis Masham to William Molyneux:
Indeed, in his book, Anstey notes that in his published correspondence with Stillingfleet, Locke cited Newton’s ‘demolition of the vortex theory’.’6 Drawing a parallel between
" Anstey, ‘Further Reflections’, 233.
~ Anstey, ‘Further Reflections’, 233, ef. John Locke, ‘Philosophise naturalis principia mathematics’, Bibliotheque miverselle et historique, 8 (1688): 436-50, esp. 440-43. For a detailed discussion see Anstey, JLNP, 91-97.
35 Anstey, ‘Further Reflections", 233, cf. Locke to William Molyneux, 2 July 1695, Carr., Letter 1921, vol, 5,406,
'* Anstey, JLNP, 97, cf. Locke, Second Reply, 384,
arguments against Descartes’ theory.34
chronology very well, and the
180
the vortex and the archeus, Anstey, perhaps unwittingly, appears to suggest that Locke did occasionally use terms of art from theories he no longer subscribed to as a useful form of shorthand. It seems perfectly reasonable to read Locke’s use of the word ‘archeus’ in this manner, particularly when we recall that this is the only instance that Locke unambiguously used an Helmontian term of art in an unqualified manner at any point after 1667. This is the only piece of evidence that could be taken to suppose that Locke was an Helmontian throughout the 37 years he lived after he left Oxford. As far as I am aware, there are no others examples of an unqualified reference to Helmontian theory after 1667 anywhere in Locke’s published or unpublished writings, in print, correspondence or manuscript. And this single piece of evidence is one which Anstey apparently believes, like Locke’s use of the ‘vortex’, might have been little more than non-committal figure of speech, an intellectual hangover from his earlier engagement with the subject.
Let us then compare these few ambiguous items with the evidence that Locke did not subscribe to Helmontian theory after
1667. Anstey turns to what appears to be a reasonably forthright dismissal of Helmontian theory written almost as soon as Locke left Oxford, moved to London, and became acquainted with the physician Thomas Sydenham.
A paper titled ‘Anatomia’, in Locke’s hand, and written in
1668, presents a number of reasons why anatomy is likely to be no use to the physician. The precise origin and significance of the paper will be discussed below, but in a paper co-authored with Anstey, John Burrows demonstrated that Locke was almost certainly responsible for writing the work,37 and his later reiteration of its themes in the drafts of the Essay suggest that he was presenting views to which he firmly adhered. In this text, Locke sought to demonstrate that the anatomist’s work is useless because we are never going to be able to penetrate into nature’s causes. Indeed, this is the first example of what Anstey describes 27 *
27 Anstey and Burrows, ‘John Locke, Thomas Sydenham, and the authorship of two
medical essays’, in Electronic British Library' Journal, 2009, article 3, 42 p.
181
as Locke's ‘corpuscular pessimism'. To illustrate his point, Locke undertakes an exercise of ‘compare and contrast’, equating the work of the anatomist with that of theorists both old and new. In doing this, he first wrote:
Ther is some thing therefor in the body & the juices too curious & fine for us to disceme which performes the offices in the several 1 parts governs the health & produces the various motions in the body intus mens agitat molem/5 & upon whose unconceivable alterations depends our health or sicknesse. hence a fright which causes some diseases as epilepsies hysterical! fits, & fatuity often cures others as agues & as some report the gout its self & tis probable in these cases twould puzzle the quickest sighted anatomist assisted too by the best microscope to frnde any sensible alteration made either in the juices or solid parts of the body. Therefor this hidden briproupyoq ' was soe much out of the reach of the senses yea & apprehension of the ancients that not knowing what to conceive it they went above the clouds for a name cald it «puoiv ava/ur/ov t© xcov uorpcov
..“I fj
OTor/eus), an expression however, obscure & insignificant more like to give us a usefull notion of the thing, then the anatomist to shew us this archeus as Helmont pleases to call it.
When revising the paper, however, he clearly felt that this description of Helmontian theory was not clear enough. So he deleted ‘as Helmont pleases to call it’, and replaced it in the margin with the phrase ‘by which name Helmont has as clearely & intelligibly explamd it to us as Aristotle by his description’.
Anstey is quite correct that ‘the target here is the anatomist’, but then continues by saying that this ‘is not tantamount to a disdainful rejection of the notion of the archeus but of a rejection 38 39 40
38 ‘The mind moves die body from within’, cf. Anstey, ‘Further Reflections’, 230, note 42.
39 ‘Demiurge’, see next note.
40 ‘A nature analogous to the element of the stars', both reference Aristotle's Generation of Animals Book 1!, Cliapter 111 736b 35ff. Daniel Sennert in his De Consensu & Dissemu Gtdemeorum & Peripateticorum cum Chymieis (Opera Omnia (Lyon, 1656), 177-284) quoted exactly this passage (200). Locke studied Sennert’s work in general and this work in particular (cf. e.g., Bodl MS Locke f, 18, 41 and 61); Sennert may well have been the source of this reference.
182
of the claims of some anatomists’.4' It is not clear how Anstey reaches this conclusion, Locke is comparing the work of anatomists with that of ancient and modem theorists and asserting that all come up very short indeed. Locke is certainly not denying that, as Anstey puts it, there is an ‘imperceptible power that governs health and produces motion in the body’, but is stating that the anatomists’ efforts at identifying and explaining are about as good as the theorists, that is to say no good at all. For the comparison to make any sense, the reader has to agree with the premise that the 5r|jj.toopyó<; and archeus are identically useful descriptions of this ‘imperceptible power’, and that their utility is nil, because they are obscure, insignificant and unintelligible.
Indeed, Locke clearly thought that his first description of the archeus was not emphatic enough on this point, so went back to make it clear that he thought it was as useful as Aristotle’s ‘obscure and insignificant’ description. If Anstey wants us to believe that Locke is somehow endorsing the ‘archeus’ here, then he must also be endorsing the Aristotelean 5r]{iioupyó¡; as an equally valid explanation of the ‘imperceptible power’, and it is clear that Locke rejected the Aristotelian theory throughout his career. Locke’s remarks in ‘Anatomía’ are no less clear. The Helmontian archeus is about as good an explanation as Aristotle’s Sripioupyoq, both of which are about as useful as the anatomist’s efforts—and Locke was singularly unimpressed by all of them. Anstey’s attempts to explain away Locke’s dismissal of the archeus are unconvincing, because Locke obtrusively went out of his way to make clear just how unimpressed he was with the archeus as an explanation of the ‘imperceptible power’ Locke knew to be at work, but which he thought beyond our reach due to his ‘corpuscular scepticism’.
But that was just one example from 'Anatomía’ where Locke expressed a degree of scepticism about Helmontian theory. As the ‘Review’ of Anstey’s book noted, there are three separate instances of Locke further asserting that we will never know whether ‘ferments’ are active agents because we cannot penetrate 41
41 Anstey, ‘Further Reflections', 231.
into natural causes.4“ And in both ‘Anatomia’ and ‘De Arte Medica' from 1669, Locke suggests that chymistry will be of no use for a practising physician.43 Nor were these isolated incidents. In a 1692 letter to Thomas Molvneux, Locke suggested that the practice of medicine was too concerned with theory, and not enough with the observation of actual diseases and their cure, again bracketing chymistry with ancient medical practice and branding the language used in both as meaningless:
To which purpose 1 fear the Galenists four humours, or the chymists sal, sulphur, and mercury, or the late prevailing invention of acid and alcali, or whatever hereafter shall be substituted to these with new applause, will upon examination be found to be but so many learned empty sounds, with
„ ,44
no precise determinate signification.
And when he was writing a projected addition to his Essay, in a chapter On the Conduct of the Understanding, regarding medicine Locke asks
were it my Business to understand Physick, would not the safer and readier way be to consult Nature her self and inform my self in the History of Diseases and their Cures, than espousing the Principles of the Dogmatists, Methodists or Chymists45 *
These remarks are consistent with those from ‘Anatomia’ and ‘De Arte Medica’. They are not the ringing endorsements of ‘HelmontianisnT or ‘mercurialist chymistry’ you might expect from a firm advocate of these theories, as Anstey apparently believes Locke was.
42 Wataisley, 'Review Article’, 265-66, cf. NA PRO 30/24/47/2, ff. 31r~v, and Kenneth Dewhurst, Dr. Thomas Sydenham (1624-1689), His Life and Original Writings (London, 1966), 85-86; f. 32v and 87; ff. 33r~v and 88.
45 Waimsley, ‘Review Article’, 267, cf. NA PRO 30/24/47/2 ff, 37r-v and Dewhurst, Sydenham, 92-93; f. 52r and Dewhurst, Sydenham, 81.
44 Locke to Thomas Molyneux, 20 January 1693, Letter 1593, Carr., vol. 4, 629.
4i Locke, The Posthumous Works of Mr. John Locke (London ! 706), 106.
184
What, then, does Anstey have to say about these apparent counter-examples to his interpretation? How does he square these pointed, critical comments about Helmontian theory and ‘chymistry’ with his view of Locke as a life-long Helmontian and chymist? In short, in these ‘Further Reflections’, he does not address them at all and it is not clear how he could reconcile them with his preferred interpretation.
§2. Locke and Sydenham
John Locke and Natural Philosophy was the culmination of Anstey’s attempts to recast the understanding of the relationship between Locke and Sydenham. Rather than Locke being an acolyte of Sydenham’s revolution in medical theory and practice, Anstey appears to hold that Sydenham was a quirky but peripheral quasi-traditional outsider whose work was transformed under Locke’s guidance and whose position was elevated by Locke’s promotion.
The ‘Review’ of John Locke and Natural Philosophy sought to show that this interpretation was questionable in a number of respects. There was no fundamental discontinuin' between Sydenham’s work prior to meeting Locke, and his work after. The Methodus Curandi Febres (1666) written before Sydenham met Locke, was in large part incorporated into its successor the Observationes Medicae (1676), written after the two men became acquainted, making the latter a continuation of the former46 Anstey’s account of the significance of case histories in Sydenham’s work is directly contradicted by Sydenham himself in the preface to the Observationes.47 And Locke’s expression of admiration for Sydenham’s new- medical methodology in
44 Walmsiey, ‘Review Article’, 274, ef. G. G. Meynell’s introduction to his edition of the Methodus—Thomas Sydenham, Methodus Curandi Febres (Folkestone, 1987), vii-xx, A detailed collation of the two works is included in GreenhiU’s edition of Sydenham’s works: Thomas Sydenham, Opera Omnia (London, IS44), ed. W. A. Greenhill, vol. I, xviii-xxi and 3 270 throughout.
47 Waimsiey, ‘Review Article’, 273-74, cf. Thomas Sydenham, The (Ms of Thomas Sydenham, M.D., ed, R, G. Latham, (London, 1848), vol. 1, 24.
185
correspondence with Thomas Molyneux firmly contradicts Anstey‘s interpretation.48 In these ‘Further Reflections’, Anstey does not comment on any of these points. Instead, he simply restates his position.
There is no doubt that Locke had enormous admiration for Sydenham, though in this he was in a small minority among his contemporaries. In my view, however, the evidence just does not support the thesis that Locke’s views about the priority of experience over speculative hypotheses, his early critique of gross anatomy for therapeutics, his views concerning our
lack of epistemic access to underlying causes of disease and his emphasis
49
on the need for natural history, were derived from Sydenham.
As evidence for this, Anstey cites his paper ‘The Creation of the English Hippocrates’."0 This paper, published in 2011, does not take account of the points made in the ‘Review’, reiterated above. But it also omits new evidence that Anstey himself has provided.
As noted above, in 2009, John Burrows use statistical analysis to demonstrate that Locke composed ‘Anatomia’ and ‘De Arte Medica’.51 Further research by Anstey and Burrows shows these papers in a new light. In a 2013 article, Burrows again used statistical techniques to analyse two further medical manuscripts from the collaboration between the two men.52 These were a ‘Dedicatory Epistle’ and ‘Preface’ written in 1669 for a projected treatise on smallpox."3 Both of these papers were written in the
48 Locke to Thomas Molyneux, 1 November 1692, Letter 1556, Corr., vol. 4, 563, and Locke to Thomas Molyneux, 20 January 1693, Letter 1593, Corr., vol. 4, 628-30, cf. Walmsley, ‘Review Article’, 278-80.
m Anstey, ‘Further Reflections’, 217.
59 Anstey', ‘The Creation of the English Hippocrates’, Medical History 55 (2011): 457-78.
51 Cf. note 37 above.
Anstey and Burrows, ‘John Locke, Thomas Sydenham, and the ‘Smallpox Manuscripts”, in English Manuscript Studies 18 (2013): 180-214.
3 NA PRO 30/24/47/2 ff. 60-63 and 64 69 respectively.
186
first person, from Sydenham’s point of view, but both were in Locke’s hand. The statistical analysis indicated that while Locke may have written the text down, the content of the text was composed by both men—some parts reflected Sydenham’s writing style, some parts Locke’s. The work was a hybrid of authorial styles, but written as if it were Sydenham’s alone. Locke’s role here was evidently that of a ghost-writer, helping to shape the prose style and argumentation of his colleague. Nor should this be a surprise, since around this time Locke acted as an amanuensis for Sydenham and also helped write expositions, apologetics and works for other associates.54
This confirmation of Locke’s role as ghost-writer for Sydenham does, however, cast the authorship of ‘Anatomia’ and ‘De Arte Medica’ in a new light. If we know Locke ghost-wrote at least parts of the smallpox ‘Dedicatory7 Epistle’ and ‘Preface’, and Anstey has put his name to such a claim, it makes it much more likely that he was ghost-writing ‘Anatomia’ and ‘De Arte Medica’ for Sydenham as well—while Locke certainly wrote ‘Anatomia’ and ‘De Arte Medica’, he may only have done so at the request, and for the use, of Sydenham. Particularly when independent contemporary evidence suggests that Sydenham was writing works on these subjects at the time,53 and the interpolated first sentence at the beginning of ‘Anatomia’, indicating that it would be incorporated into a larger work, is in Sydenham’s hand. In short, Anstey’s claim that Locke independently authored ‘Anatomia’ and ‘De Arte Medica’ is weakened by the evidence that Anstey and Burrows provide to show that Locke acted as Sydenham’s ghost-writer on the smallpox pieces.
54 The Essay concerning Toleration, the Fundamental Constitutions of Carolina and perhaps the entry on Carolina in Ogilby’s America might all have been written by Locke for and at the request of others. Cf. Walmsley, ‘Review Article*. 281-82. 55
55 Around January 1669, John Ward recorded in his diary that 'Dr. Sydenham is writing a book weh will bring many physittans about his ears to decrie ye vsefiilnes of natural philosophy and ye necessitie of knowledge in Anatomie in subordination to physic’ (Wellcome Library MS 6173. p. 957 cf. Folger Library MS V.a, 295 f. 14.?v>,
187
To repeat: Anstey's 2011 article on The Creation of the English Hippocrates’ takes no account of the points made in the ‘Review Article’, nor the new evidence of Locke’s role as ghostwriter of the smallpox ‘Dedicatory Epistle’ and ‘Preface’. Citing this article once again does not address these points. It is not clear how Anstey could reconcile this evidence with his interpretation.
Indeed, in the case of Sydenham, there are also significant gaps in the evidence that Anstey presents. Part of the reason Anstey believes Sydenham is unlikely to have played a significant role in Locke’s career is his estrangement from the established medical community. Anstey advances two lines of argument support this conclusion. The first is that Sydenham had few wealthy patients—perhaps indicating, in Anstey’s view, that Sydenham was something of a pariah and therefore inconsequential. The second is that Sydenham was not close to Boyle, and Boyle was unlikely to have valued Sydenham’s work. The general conclusion to be drawn was that Locke was unlikely to have been impressed by such a peripheral figure, and if any influence and instruction flowed between the two men it was from Locke (a well-respected figure with friends in high places) to Sydenham (the outsider).
These arguments are non-sequiturs. Sydenham’s professional standing has no bearing whatever on what Locke might have thought of him. A pariah to one man is a prophet to another, and Locke doubtless made up his own mind on the matter. Equally, whether Boyle valued or denigrated Sydenham’s work has no particular bearing on Locke’s view. Locke’s reputation was not established by parroting the received views of his contemporaries and, as we shall see below, Locke did not always agree with Boyle. Equally important though, is evidence that counters the premises of both of these arguments. In the first place, as noted by G. G. Meynell, there is evidence that Sydenham had broadly mixed set of patients from a wide range of backgrounds—from aristocrats to the poor.’6 Sydenham might have bemoaned his 55
55 O. G- Meynell, Materials far a Bibliography of Thomas Sydenham (Folkestone, 1988), 24-25.
difficulty in securing wealthy patients, but he clearly managed to do so. Equally, it is hard to think him completely cut off from the aristocracy when he lived next door to Katherine, Lady Ranelagh (Boyle’s sister) in Pall Mall. Or that he lent substantial sums to aristocrats, as evidenced by the loan of £200 to his patient James Cecil, the third Earl of Salisbury, recorded at the time of the Earl’s death.57 There might have been some good political reasons why Sydenham, a former officer in the Parliamentarian army, might have had some trouble making his way in Restoration Society, but he evidently managed to do so.
Secondly, with respect to Sydenham’s relationship with Boyle, for some reason Anstey omits perhaps the single most telling piece of evidence. There are very few survivors from Boyle’s library, but one of the handful of books still identifiable from his collection indicates a connection with Sydenham. In the Wellcome Library there is a copy of Gianfrancesco Riva di San Nazzaro’s Tractatus de peste (Lyon, 1538)/'' Boyle’s signature appears in the middle of the title page. This page also bears Sydenham’s name in the top margin on the right-hand side of the page. The book appears to have been a gift from one to the other —most likely from Boyle to Sydenham, as Boyle appears not to have signed the books that he kept in his library'/1 This surely suggests a more than passing relationship between the two men. Locke, for instance, generally only gave his books away to very close associates/0 Why Anstey fails to mention this is not clear— the book is well known. A photo of its title page is reproduced in
’7 Meynell, Materials, 26-27, 79.
58 Wellcome Library, shelfmark 5756/D.
59 I. Aramov, M. Hunter and H. Yosbimoto, Boyle's Books: The Evidence of his Citations (London, 2010), xi.
*° Most of the titles gifted from his library were given to Damans and Francis Masham. Anthony Collins, Pierre Coste and Edward Clarke, ef. J. Harrison and P. Laslett, The Library of John Locke (Oxford. 1971), 44.
a pair of articles about the men, and it is mentioned in a recent review of Boyle’s reading/11
Regarding Locke’s relationship to Sydenham, Anstey does not address evidence inconsistent witli his interpretation, whether from questions posed in the ‘Review Article’ of his book, from his own analysis of Locke and Sydenham’s writings, or elsewhere. A remark in his ‘Further Reflections’ may provide some indication why. Regarding his interpretation of Locke’s medical interests, Anstey says:
Where 1 have diverged from the more traditional view of Locke’s intellectual formation and the role of medicine therein, is the manner in which I have downplayed die influence of the London physician Thomas Sydenham on Locke’s methodological views.6“
Anstey sees himself as playing an active role—‘the manner in which I have downplayed the influence of London physician Thomas Sydenham’, Rather than letting the evidence guide his interpretation, he has avowedly sought to ‘downplay’ Sydenham’s influence on Locke. This could be read as seeking to impose a predetermined pattern onto history, rather than constructing the history from the evidence.
§3. Locke’s ‘deference’ to Boyle
Why would Anstey wish to ‘downplay’ the impact of Sydenham’s thinking on Locke? One reason seems to be that Anstey wishes to (re-)establish Boyle as the primary inspiration for Locke’s natural philosophical thinking, the ‘Further Reflections’ providing some examples of this theme in Anstey’s work. Anstey represents Locke as Boyle’s obedient pupil. For example, when stating that Locke was less than consistent in his
61 S. F, Fulton, ‘Boyle and Sydenham’, in Journal of the. History of Medicine 11 (1956): 351-52 and K. D. Keele, ‘The Sydenham-Boyle Theory of Morbific Panicles’, in Medical History 18 (1974): 240 48, facing 240, cf. Aramov, Hunter and Yoshimoto, Boyle 's Books, xi. *
*2 Anstey, ‘Further Reflections’, 216-17.
natural philosophical thinking, he cites Boyle as a reason: ‘Locke’s...deference to his mentors such as Boyle in chymistry...are also factors in play’.6' When describing Locke’s supposedly inconsistent views in the Essay, Anstey says;
[Locke’s] tentative endorsement of corpuscularianism in the Essay and his ongoing interest in mercurial chymistry, far from being inconsistent with
Helmontianism, are exactly what one would expect of Locke, given his
64
close association with Boyle.
This form of argument also appeared in John Locke and Natural Philosophy. Boyle was working to Bacon’s agenda in natural philosophy, Locke was too. If Boyle engaged in ‘speculative natural philosophy’, Locke did too. If Boyle was an alchemist and an Helmontian, then Locke was too.6'
There’s no doubt that Locke and Boyle had a long-standing and productive working relationship, and that Locke sought out and respected Boyle’s views. But did Locke defer to Boyle? Indeed, did Locke defer to anyone intellectually? Locke took many notes from Boyle’s books and made notes on chmyistry from the man himself. Locke adopted an argument for a distinction between Primary and Secondary Qualities that no doubt drew upon Boyle’s earlier work on this subject (amongst others). But, in ‘Morbus’ Locke also went out of his way to criticise Boyle’s explanations for certain natural phenomena.66 And in ‘Respirationis Usus’ Locke presented views on the properties of the air at odds with Boyle’s.6 Locke doubtless valued Boyle’s work, and agreed with him on numerous points.
Anstey, ‘Further Reflections’, 232.
64 Anstey, ‘Further Reflections’, 234,
65 Anstey spells out these themes of his interpretation almost verbatim. Anstey, JLNP, 8-9. "
m Walmsley, ‘Morbus’, 382-87.
67 Walmsley, ‘John Locke on Respiration’, in Medical History 51 (2007): 453-76, at 471 and 475-76,
191
But Anstey will have to make a more compelling case that Locke deferred to Boyle on any subject if he wishes to build an interpretation of Locke’s work upon such a claim. More broadly, an accurate account of Locke’s thought can only be constructed through an independent assessment of Locke’s work. Anstey started his career as a Boyle scholar and readers may suspect that he reads Locke’s writings only as a series of footnotes to Boyle’s work, rather than as the products of an independent thinker with his own perspective, interests and approach.
§4. Conclusion
Anstey's “Further Reflections” are welcome, but several questions remain unanswered regarding his interpretation of Locke’s natural philosophical career.
First, how can Anstey assert that Locke was a life-long Helmontian and an adherent of ‘mercurialist transmutational alchemy’, when the evidence for this assertion is extremely scaup' and somewhat equivocal, and the evidence against it consistent, coherent, compelling and voluminous? In the 37 years after Locke left Oxford, Anstey can find only one unqualified use of an Helmontian phrase in the entirety of Locke’s published and unpublished writings and correspondence, a use, moreover, which Anstey seems to intimate may well be nothing more than a contemporary turn of phrase. Compare this to the numerous examples where Locke denigrates Helmontian and ‘chymical’ theory from ‘Anatomia’ onwards, and his vigorous espousal of an austere mechanism in the drafts and published editions of the Essay. Compare also Locke’s reaction when he noted that the austere mechanism of the Essay was inconsistent with Newton’s discovery' of universal gravitation. Locke did not assert that he was unconcerned because his mechanism accommodated all sorts of non-mechanical agency, or that he was undisturbed by inconsistency. Rather, he made changes to his argument to accommodate Newton’s convincing demonstration of non- mechanical action. Locke remained interested in the practice of chymistry throughout his life, but there is no substantial evidence Locke believed in Helmontian theory or any other non-
192
mechanical ‘chymical’ theory after he left Oxford. There is a great deal of evidence that he rejected all speculative theories, Helmontianism included, and advanced an austere mechanism, only modifying his views to accommodate Newton’s work.
Second, many questions remain concerning Anstey’s interpretation of the relationship between Locke and Sydenham. Anstey’s claims about a change in Sydenham’s works before and after he met Locke are undermined by the fact that the Methodus is largely incorporated into the Observationes. Anstey’s claims about the importance of case histories in Sydenham’s work after meeting Locke are refuted by Sydenham in the preface to the Observationes. Anstey’s account of the relationship is inconsistent with Locke’s own reports on the matter. Anstey appears to ignore his own evidence that Locke sometimes acted as a ghost-writer for Sydenham, making it much more likely that ‘Anatomia’ and ‘De Arte Medica’ are similarly hybrid works, similarly inspired by and written for Sydenham—a surmise supported by independent contemporary evidence. Anstey casts doubt on Sydenham’s position in society' and reputation in scientific circles, but does not address the evidence that Sydenham had a number of wealthy patients, and that a book passed between Sydenham and Boyle. Individually, any one of these points would weaken Anstey’s arguments and undermine his interpretation. Collectively, they indicate significant issues with its foundations.
Third, Anstey appears to assume that Locke was little more than Boyle’s assiduous acolyte, emulating his master on key natural philosophical issues. Anstey can certainly point to a close, productive and long-standing working and personal relationship between the two men. But he has provided no clear-cut evidence that Locke deferred to Boyle, that he always sought to emulate his colleague or that changes in Locke’s natural philosophical views were invariably, or even typically, brought about directly and exclusively through Boyle’s personal direction or the influence of his published works.
Finally, Anstey’s work, as most recently expressed in these ‘Further Reflections’, raises broader question of how historical
figures should be understood and interpretations of their work constructed. Is it right for the historian to ‘downplay’ this or that Interpretation? Is it right for a historian to assert that one thinker deferred to another, without providing clear evidence that this is the case? Can a historian convincingly assert that ‘the evidence just does not support’ an interpretation while overlooking evidence inconsistent with their own views? How should historians develop, and then revise, their interpretations? 68
London
m 1 am grateful to Professor J. R. Milton for several helpful corrections and suggestion*, and to the editor for a number of judicious emendations, and the opportunity to present this article here.
194
THE WIDER WORLD OF LOCKE’S LANDLADY RABSY SMITHSBY
Bridget Clarke
Abstract:
This essay explores the life and family of Rabsy Smithsby, Locke’s accomplice while he was in Holland and his landlady in London, showing her connections with both the Royal Household and the Cromwell family as well as with Locke and his friends, and with leading merchants and adventurers of her era, as well as noting her surprisingly modem career as ‘personal shopper’ and bank account owner.
After John Locke’s exile in Holland ended in 1689, he lived for the next two years at Mrs. Rabsy Smithsby’s house at the first door on the left hand in Dorset Court, Channel Row, Westminster, renting an apartment for £5 10s a quarter Dorset Court was ‘a very handsome open Place, containing but six Houses, which are large and well built, fit for Gentry- to dwell in; of which those towards the Thames have Gardens towards the Water Side very pleasant’.1 Locke’s friendship with Mrs. Smithsby went back many years3—but who was she?
Her father was William Smithsby,"’ a man who served the Royal family all his life, originally being barber to James VI and I. He was paid ‘After King James’ death £382 in frill satisfaction
1 Dorset Court had been built after 1680 by Maurice Emmett on the she of Dorset House, destroyed in the Great Fire. See John Strype, Survey of the Cities of London anti Westminster (2 volst., London, 1720), i, 63.
2 Roger Woolhouse suggests that her sister Anne had been employed as a domestic at Exeter House by Lord Shaftesbury, and that Locke could have met the Sinithsbys there. Roger Woolhouse, Locke: A Biography (Cambridge, 2007), 197.
3 His father was William of Melton Mowbray who married Ursula Brown (d. May 1617) and whose children were William, Thomas, Elizabeth (married Thomas Deepertp 1617), Jane, Joyce, (m. Howell) Anne (m. Goodwynne) and Nicholas, baptised 23 Oct 1597. Will April 1620.
of all debts due to him’,4 He had married Rabsey (Cromwell alias Williams of Huntingdon)'' on 1 August 1622 by license at St. Mary le Strand and they eventually had a large family, including Richard. George,h Martha,7 Ursula, Judith, Anne, Maria and Rahsy (b. 1640). He became Keeper of the Privy Lodgings and Standing Wardrobe8 within the honour of Hampton Court by letters patent, and by 1628 had moved there, as a certificate of residence shows him to be liable for taxation in the Royal Household and not in his previous area, a hundred of Hertford.9 In 1635 Charles I, a supporter of Tradescanf s museum, ordered ‘Keeper of Hampton Court Wardrobe William Smithsby to deliver unto John Tredeskyn (Tradescant) various items of royal clothing for his museum including King Hemy the Eighth his capp, his hawking bagg and spurs’.19
Her mother Rabsey was a descendant of Sir Richard Williams alias Cromwellf 1502-1544), a Welsh soldier whose mother was Katherine Cromwell, sister of Thomas Cromwell. Williams came to court and profited from the dissolution of the monasteries, making a fortune and buying estates, and, following Henry VII’s recommendation to the Welsh to take a family name, he took Cromwell’s, He was not affected by the fall of Cromwell, however, and in 1543 was made a gentleman of the Privy
* Issues of the Exchequer 25 May 1627: ‘William Smithsby, barber to the late King James, for necessaries for his Majesty’s use £382 in full satisfaction of all debts due to him from and by his Maj said late father for his lodgings and other necessaries provided and employed in his said late father’s services by writ date 15 August 1626’.
3 She had previously been married to Philip Morgan
sb. 1626, Berkhampsted
7 b. 1620s
* There were Standing Wardrobes at Windsor and Hampton Court and Removing Wardrobes that travelled with the monarch.
9 1628 El 15/363/551629 El 15/380/123 164IE/115/86 21 Oct 1636 0/120/43742. mis probably relates to a moated house at Woodcock Lodge Farm, Little Berkhampstead that belonged to the Smithsbys.
)* Now at the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford,
196
Chamber. Sir Richard eventually became a great grandfather of Oliver Cromwell, who on the deed of jointure at time of his marriage was called alias Williams. 11 Many of Rabsy’s contacts throughout her life had Cromwellian connections.
Presumably Rabsy grew up at Hampton Court with her brothers and sisters and in close contact with her uncle and cousins. Her uncle was Thomas Smithsby, who in the 1620s was Esquire Saddler to the King and was paid for 6 Sardelle saddles,1" and by 1640 was Under House Keeper of Hampton Court Palace, living at Palace Gate House ‘built part with brick part with Timber and covered with Tile, situate upon or neer to the Greene commonly called Hampton Court Green, on the west syde of the way to the fery place’. Thomas, too, was taxed in the Royal Household and not in his previous area, London, where he was a citizen and Saddler; in 1640 he petitioned the King for payment of £2,885 12 6d for goods and saddlery delivered to the Great Wardrobe.14
He had married Martha Smith at St Dunstan’s in the West on 29 January 162015. Their children included Thomas junior, Sara,
11 Sir Richard Williams------------Frances Murfyn
Henry--------------------------Francis
Robert Henry Williams alias Cromwell
Oliver
12 These were saddles used to accustom colts to the feel of a saddle—they were made in the form of a great saddle, but only of cloth stuffed with straw and no leather, wool or iron. Books of stable warrantes l’RO t.C 5/7
13 Ernest Law, The History of Hampton Court Palace (London, 1903), 265. In 1515 a wharf had been built to help with building Hampton Court, and houses for officials were built round the gate to the Palace.
14 Thomas was elected Master of the Saddlers Company on 14 August 1647, but unusually he refused to hold office.
15 She was the daughter of John Smith, cordwainer.
197
Rebecca, Anne, Elizabeth, John and James.16 Thomas amassed considerable wealth, being involved in large transactions with Charles I. For example, in 1640 he lent the King £10,000 secured by the Fanners of the Customs.17 In 1644 he offered to make up the sum of £5,469 out of £10,000 required for the Kings service. The King’s income came not out of current revenue, which had been used years in advance, but out of loans and advances which would not fall due for years to come. The customs were fanned to a group of men in return for a lump sum to the Exchequer, which gave the Government ready money which others had to collect. The fanners in the inner circle had tremendous resources, but they were joined by an outer circle of merchants and citizens like Thomas Smithsby who contributed to loans and often kept a deposit with a fanner to cover future custom dues. Clever merchants discovered that they could speculate by buying cheap assignments of all sorts of old debts.115 By 1654 farmers owed £68,128 by assignments and not less than £10,651 of this was owed to Thomas.
The Civil War affected the Smithsby family in various ways. William and Thomas’s careers were dependent upon the Court but as the parliamentary army began to win battles they must have felt their relationship with Cromwell was an insurance policy against financial disaster and likely to be a help when their children grew older.
William Smithsby was still in charge of the Privy Lodgings when Charles I was seized by the army and entrusted to the
u Thomas b 1629?; Sara daughter of T Smithsby baptised May 1632 St Dunstan in the West; Rebecca baptised 19 November 1633 St Dunstan in the West, m. Thomas Hartley, currier; John baptised 5 August 1635 St Dunstan in the West; Anne, m Hezekiab Haynes; James b 1646?
’' 9 November 1640 An Exchequer warrant to pay His Majesty’s saddler the interest
of £5,503 8 1 Od, **
** W. Percy Harper, ‘The Significance of the Farmers of the Customs in Public Finance in the Middle of the Seventeenth Century’, Economica 25 (1929): 61 70, at 68: ‘It is alleged that he hath by suits and other ways had from them about £4,500 in money’ (citing British Museum, Stowe MS, 185, fo.17 elseq,).
198
keeping of Col Whalley19 and his regiment at Hampton Court in 1647. Whalley, suspecting that the King had escaped, went to Smithsby, demanding to be taken to the Privy Lodgings, where he found that indeed the King had fled to the Isle of Wight. Smithsby had taken charge of royal jewels, miniatures and other small objects; he also hid a number of pictures which otherwise would have been disposed of by the Commonwealth but which he was able to hand over to Charles II at the Restoration.
He remained in charge at Hampton Court at the time of the King’s execution and throughout the Commonwealth, but even though the Commonwealth Parliament was scrupulous in settling Royal bills and salaries, they were often years in arrears—‘On Aug 10 1655 pay unto William Smithsby £103 3 4 for salary of £1 1 8 for 2 years ended 5 March last and from thenceforth to continue the payment thereof unto him quarterly by equal portions’.
The royal goods were in his custody when the inventory' was taken in 1649 at the start of a gigantic 3 year sale by the Commonwealth.20 His brother Thomas was still living in Palace Gate House and on 4 May 1652 Thomas and his wile were charged with having concealed hangings, beds and bedding, carpets, curtains and 4 pieces of old purple cloth belonging to Lord Cottington. Thomas pleaded that he held goods as security for a debt due from Lord Cottington and on 30 June was ordered to bring goods to Haberdashers Hall. On 22 July, information was given that the Smithsbys concealed these goods and kept them for own use. The case dragged on but on 28 September Thomas Smithsby was discharged as there was no proof of concealment.
19 Colonel Edward Whalley was a son of Frances Cromwell, aunt of Oliver Cromwell and second wife of Richard Whatley. Despite treating the King with courtesy, as a regicide he had to flee to Cambridge, Massachusetts after the Restoration, living there for sixteen years before his death.
20 See Jennifer Potter, Strange Blooms: The Curkms Lives ant! Adventures of the John Trades cants (London, 2006), ch. IS. ‘One hawkeing glove of Henry ye Eighth sold for 2s Od and six of his combe cases for 7 s'.
199
He was still involved financially with whoever was in government. He had various dealings in London property over the years; tor example, when the Duchess of Buckingham left her house and no longer had to pay for its upkeep the rental income had been assigned directly to Thomas Smithsby in late 1644/45.21 The House of Commons Journal, 15 January 1649, shows £3,000 due owing to Thomas Smithsby. In 1653 the forfeited lands of John Carroll in Ireland were granted to Thomas Smithsby and Sir William Flower, both Protestants who had supported the English Commonwealth during the Irish confederate war. During the Commonwealth the Manor of Chelsea was seized among forfeited lands and w’as sold in 1654 by certain trustees appointed for that purpose, of whom Thomas was one, and put in trust for the coheirs of Duke of Hamilton.22 On 21 Feb 1654 a Warrant for payment of £15,599 to the Navy was signed by various people including, once again, Thomas Smithsby.
The Cromwellian side of the Smithsby family, for reasons that are not far to seek, gradually became more prominent. In 1642 Martha, Thomas’s daughter, married as his second wife, John Blackwell senior (b. 1594/5), a wealthy London merchant, Grocer to the King, and a fervent Puritan.23 He and Martha had 8 children and a house at Mortlake. By 1650 he was owed £2,798 for groceries supplied to Charles I. Blackwell had a son, John (b. 1624), by his first wife, who with his father joined a Trained Band in the City to reinforce the Parliamentarian army—John senior as a captain and John junior as an ensign. John junior later joined the Parliamentarian army and fought at Naseby and
21 See Philip McF.vansoneya, ‘The Sequestration and Dispersal of the Buckingham Collection’, Journal ofthe History of Collections 8 (1986): 133-54.
22 Daniel hysons, ‘Chelsea: (part 1 of 3)’, in The Environs of London: Volume 2, County of Middlesex (London, 1795), pp. 70-115. British History Online http://www.british-history.ac. uk/londim-environs/vot2/pp70-l 15 [accessed 5 May 2017].
21 Blackwell snr led a faction that broke up altar rails at St Thomas the Apostle,
London. See Julie Spraggon, Puritan Iconoclasm during the English Civil War
(Woodbridge, 2003), 139.
200
Langport. He became Treasurer at War for Cromwell and tried to improve the payment to soldiers during the war. He was always dose to the Smithsby family and married Elizabeth Smithsby (d. 1669), daughter of a James Smithsby, in 1647 24
George, who had matriculated at Christ Church Oxford in 1647 aged 21, ' became one of Cromwell’s Life Guards and part of the Hispaniola expedition that captured Jamaica from the Spaniards. Oliver Cromwell had written to General Penn, ‘I must commend also to you young Smithsby, who hath been of my life-guard. I believe him very stout, and one that takes great affection to the sea, and has been very much there of late. I pray you own him for my sake. He is my kinsman and if you have any employment that way, or which may fall, command him to it, as you shall judge him fit, and after you have seen his behaviour."5 On 20 January 1656 George was appointed Captain.
Thomas junior27 enrolled at Inner Temple in June 1648 and became a Fellow of All Souls Oxford in 1648,“'' By the mid 1650s, he was Clerk of the Protector’s Privy Seal,“1’ In September 1654, Thomas complained he was ‘deprived of the priviledges and profits due to (them) equally as to other Master of Arts in the Colledge it is this day ordered (they) shall henceforth receave the same profits and privileges as other Master of Arts in the same
24 One of their sons was Sir Lambert Blackwell, appointed Gentleman of the Privy Chamber in 1697, and knighted as envoy to Genoa in 1698.
25 He had been at school at Croydon, Surrey ( Mr Burton) and first matriculated at Sidney Sussex College Cambridge before migrating to Oxford
26 See The Writings and Speeches of Oliver Cromwell, with elucidations; by Thomas Carlyle, ed. Sophia C. Lomas, with an introduction by C. H. Firth (.1 vois.. London. 1904), iii, 456 (Supplement no. 94).
r> Listed as son and heir apparent of Thomas Smithsby gentleman, armiger, from Hampton Court Middx
28 He was at St Johns Cambridge in 1646 when he was 17, and admitted to University College Oxford July 1648 (BA 1649 MA1651) **
** Prior to 1307 the Privy Seal was kept by the Keeper of the Wardrobe,
eolledge in respect of dividends in the colledge or otherwise’.30 His brother John’1 matriculated in 1650 and was Demy at Magdalen and BA 1653. He was told by order of the new visitors that he might stand as a candidate in the All Souls College elections in November 1653.
Thomas junior and John never achieved the careers they had hoped for. Joint Smithsby was buried on 5 April 1658 in the parish of Hampton. Thomas had died three years earlier in 1655, leaving a will in which he left to my intended wife Mistress Dorothie Kinnersley’2 the sum of £150 pounds wch I desire may be bestowed on a necklace of pearls and a diamond locket and presented to her by my honourable father who I make my sole executor and my desire is he should hand it within one year after my decease and this - with the 3 rings and bracelet that I formerly gave her amount to about 200 pounds to my dear father the great diamond ring he gave me. to my brother John 2 hundred pounds with the interest due for the same upon the lands in Chelsey to my nephew' John Blackwell fiftie pounds to my brother James my turkio stone ring to my niece Martha a piece of plate of tenne pounds on her marriage, to my good friend master Thompson tenne pounds for preaching my funeral sermon and to buy mourning to all my Fathers servants 40s a piece and to my own servants 50s a piece to Goody Silver 40s—I give to my dear father the remainder’,33
Dorothy’s father Clement was another who managed to swing between the court and Cromwell. He had been one of Charles 1 ’s most intimate servants in the Wardrobe but when the Commonwealth was trying in 1649 to sell the goods and personal
30 The Register of the Visitors of The University of Oxford, from A.D. 1647 A.D. 1658, ed. Montagu Burrows (London, 1881), [for Aug 15th, 1650J, 307.
Described as Gentleman from Hampton
'' Dorothy Kinnersley, daughter of Clement Kinnersley, was baptised 13 September 1634 in Wandsworth ; she eventually married John Betts 2 February 1658
A Prerogative Court of Canterbury Wills, vol. 8, 1657-1660 (London, 1936; British Record Society vol. 6t), 627
202
estate of the late King, he was one of the commissioners and contractors organising the sale to the best of advantage of the Commonwealth. However, like William Smithsby, he managed to smuggle out some of the Royal art treasures to be hidden by Royalist friends. Although the Palace and contents were put up for sale, only the furnishings were disposed of and the Palace failed to find a buyer—it was granted to Cromwell, who took up occupancy in 1654. By 1655 Kinnersley was His Highness’ Wardrobe Keeper, responsible for the redecoration of Hampton Court, and like Cromwell, he preferred tapestries to paintings, which he felt were a poor man’s substitute for a tapestry. Of the works of art withdrawn from sale worth £35,497, tapestries made up £33,000.’4 Cromwell died in 1658’5 and at the Restoration Kinnersley was given three days to restore all the palaces for the King. He managed to raid the houses of Cromwell’s widow and Richard Cromwell and reclaim a lot of ex-Royal treasures which, together with those that had been hidden by royalists, enabled him to make the palaces fit for a King. Kinnersley demanded £7,000 in back pay and claimed he had prevented £500,000 of the King’s goods being sold/’6
Thomas’s daughter Elizabeth married Simon Middleton, son of Sir Hugh Middleton, goldsmith and founder of the New River Company and his daughter Anne married Hezekiah Haynes (1621-93), another Cromwellian, in 1653.’' Having emigrated with his family in 1633 to New England Haynes had returned in 1637 to the family home at Copford Hall, Essex, and stayed on to join the Parliamentary army. He became a Major-General,
34 Jerry Brotton, The Sale of the Late King's Gootbt: Charles I & His Art Collection (London, 2007), 278.
15 Kinnersley marched in Oliver Cromwell’s funeral procession as Keeper of the Wardrobe at Whitehall.
36 He was Yeoman of the Removing Wardrobe from 1660 1662 and helped by 2 grooms and 3 pages he looked after furnishings when Court moved palace to palace.
M His father was a devout Puritan who became Governor of Massachusetts and Connecticut.
supervising Essex, Norfolk and Suffolk during the Commonwealth.
Apart from her two cousins, Rabsy also lost her parents and aunt and uncle within a few years in her late teens and twenties. William’s wife Rabsey was buried on 6 December 1660 at St Mary Hampton and William, by then the late Keeper of the Kings Privy Lodgings, died on 2 December 1662.38 39 Rabsy was left £300 in her father’s will.40 Thomas’ wife Martha died in 1656 and was buried at St Dunstan in the West on 6 May, followed by Thomas in 1658.4)
Various members of the family were involved with the events leading up to the Restoration. Both Blackwells had walked in Cromwell’s funeral procession but in May 1659 a declaration to the former Speaker inviting members of the Long Parliament to return was delivered by Captain Blackwell and Major Haynes among others including Anthony Ashley Cooper, later to be Locke’s employer. When the King was restored, Blackwell’s career as military Treasurer ended; the Blackwells were excluded from pardon as regicides and had to restore the lands they had
'* Calendar of Treasury Books vol 1 160-167
w Probate 11 July 1662 PROB/l 1/308/546
40 The will states ‘that 1 William Smilhsby of Hampton Court in the County of Middlesex Esq the thirteenth day of October in the year of our Lord 1660 This my last will and testament —and bequeath to my son Richard S the sum of one hundred pounds and all my wearing apparel and do bequeath unto my d Ursula the wife of Christopher Barber the sum of £200 Judith wife of Nightingale Hynd £200 Anne £100 should she be married to W Dickenson but if not £300
Martha £300
Mary £300
Rabsy £300
"! His death was noted in the register of St John Hackney as dying on 6 Sept but being buried at St Dunslans on 23 September 1658,His will SWPT 458 iri PCC Wooton 627 Mis executors were his two sons in law Hezekiah Haynes and Simon Middleton, and John Blackwell junior (by now MP for Surrey) was guardian of the younger children.
204
acquired.42 They never received an official pardon and in 1662 were found guilty and given life imprisonment, a sentence which does not seem to have been enforced. Blackwell junior spent much time in Ireland where he had acquired property, but in 1669 he was back in London trying, with James Smithsby, Mary Smithsby,43 Simon Middleton and Rebecca Hartley44 to reclaim monies by means of a House of Lords petition from the farmers of customs in connection with a loan of £10,000 Thomas Smithsby had lent to the Crown in 1640. This was unsuccessful 43 In the 1660s Rabsy had dealings with Edward Backwell (1618-83), a goldsmith who also acted as a banker for a variety of people including the Queen.46 He accepted money deposits returnable on demand—what was called running cash. BackwelTs customers were Crown and government officials and merchants, and he also sold at a profit former Crown properties at Hampton Court, which may have been the origin of his connection with the Smithsbys. James Smithsby’s name appears in the ledgers on his own account and when he is paid £ 130 by Rabsy:
1668-1670
Mrs Rabsey Smithsby
By balance from leger 2 Folio
Memo no part of this money to be paid
But upon endorsement on ye obligation 487 13
42 Blackwell senior had not been a judge at the King’s trial but assisted with administration and had been paid £1000 by the Commons for expenses.
43 She married Nathaniel Wickes in 1672.
44 She married Thomas Hartley of the Curriers Company
45 In 1684 Blackwell went to Boston and tried to establish a chartered bank in Massachusetts, but this was short lived. Then in 16S8 William Penn asked him to become Governor of Pennsylvania. He eventually returned to England and died at Bethnal Green in 1701.
46 BackwelTs ledgers are now a UNESCO Memory of the World (UK) as the oldest systematic set of banking records in the UK, a site in possession of the Royal Bank of Scotland.
205
Mrs Rabsey Smithsby To balance carried to leger S Folio
362 130
By balance from leger R Folio 588 130
Memo no money to be paid but by endorsement on the obligation By interest Accompt 582 14 10 4
Mrs Rabsey Smithsby
July 13 129 for interest to the 2 instant
P her self on from that
Time to pay 6 p cent 1118 4
Nov 4 231 To 4m interest p herself 2 12 —
Nov 4 232 To Mr James Smithsby 130 144 10 4
Mrs Rabsey Smithsby
Novem 2 S1 By money at 51/2 p cent 14
Memo no part of this money to be paid but by endorsement upon the obligation
James Smithsby also had account with Backwell:
Nov 28 1669
By 2 notes £30 £20
cr
50
October 30
177 to his man
D
20
Novem 2
167 To William Foster
30
This bank account marks the start of a prosperous career. By 1674, when he was 28 and had married Mary Green (aged 23), 7 James Smithsby (ca. 1646-1691) was attached to the Royal Household as woollen draper in ordinary to Charles II and had become the man of business of Theophilus, 7lh Earl of Huntingdon (1655-1701). In 1677 he contributed to Charles’ Act for raising money to build 30 ships of war. By 1682 he was paying Westminster rates in the alley in Russell St and in 1684 in St Martins Lane. On June 21 1687 he received £469 9s for cloth furnished by him for the service of the Great Wardrobe in 1685.47 48
47 Spinster daughter of John Green, Recorder of London.
4!! See Leslie G. Mattltews, ‘Pay Book of the Court Apothecary in the Time of William and Mary, 1691’, Medical History 22, (1978): 161-73, at 168. Compare 163: ‘In attendance on the Court or occupying administrative position in the Departments of
206
The first extant letter between James and the Earl of Huntingdon is dated 20 January 1672/3 and mentions ‘black cloath and patterns of druggetts’,49 but soon the letters touch upon all aspects of Huntingdon’s life; in 1674, Smithsby is sending down a dozen silver plates,50 in 1676, he is happy ‘yr Lordshipp liked the candlesticks’,51; public events are noted, and the Parliamentary programme is mentioned.
Once associated with Shaftesbury and Exclusion Bill, probably due to his fear of popery', Huntingdon was back as a Court supporter in 1681 and a member of Privy Council in 1683. He was among those signing the order proclaiming James II king on 23 April 1685, and his wife was given a role serving Princess Anne while Huntingdon was made a Gentleman of the Bedchamber to her husband. In October 1688, the king authorised Huntingdon to raise Horse and Foot militia against invasion and in early November he joined the regiment in Plymouth. But large numbers started to desert to William of Orange and Huntingdon was taken prisoner by the Earl of Bath on 24 November.
James Smithsby was in constant correspondence with Huntingdon during this time, on 29 November 1688 writing that ‘the Lord Churchill, the Duke of Grafton, Colonel Barteiott were gone on Sunday to the Prince of Orange and early Monday morning that Prince George and the Duke of Ormond were likewise gone, and not long after the Princess and Lady Churchill and Mrs Barteiott were missing and have not been heard of since’.52 He attended a meeting between the King’s Commissioners and the Prince of Orange in early December and wrote on 18 December passing on the intelligence he had gathered
State and to whom medicines were supplied [Included) James Smithsby (supplier to or connected with the Great Wardrobe)’,
i,<) Hastings family papers. Huntington Library MSS Dept. HA 12421
311 Huntington Library MS. HAS2423
51 Huntington Library MS. HA 12425
Huntington Library MS. HA12453
207
On Sunday His Majtie returned to Whitehall since well there has passed several expresses between him and the Prince of Orange and last night Marquess Halifax Earl of Shrewsbury and Lord de la Mare attended his Majtie from the Prince what their message was I cannot yet leame. The Prince his guards are at Whitehall and St James and His Majtie has removed out of towne to make room for the Princes troopes. His Majtie went about 11 oclock this day for Rochester which makes people v apprehensive that he designs for beyond there.53
Huntingdon’s wife, exploiting her contacts with Princess Anne, worked hard in London to get him freed, but unfortunately died in childbirth on 24 December 1688 two days before he gained his freedom. Smithsbv continued as his informant, writing on 6 August 1690 of ‘news this day of the sailing of 3 ships loaded with ammunition and arms for Ireland and two others going richly loaded with persons of quality and goods. Later in the month 1 have paid My Lord Scarsdale 30 guineas on ye Ldsh pd bill I have received fifty' pounds this week of the Ashby carrier’.34 Smithsby died in 1691.
When he died he left his two daughters £6,000 each while his wife had the lease of the house in St Martin in the Fields and his valuable New River share. He had also bought the freehold of Milkhouse Bridge, 27 acres NW of Bethnal Green.55
By the early 1680s Rabsy already must have been a close friend of John Locke, for in November 1683 a letter from Locke to Edward Clarke,56 * dealing with the copies of Locke’s politically
Huntington Library MS. HA!2457
’4 Huntington Library MS. HA 12459
" Margaret, who married Sir Francis Head, Baronet, at St Peter le Poer in May 1692, and Anne, who married Sir Hans Hamilton.
56 Edward Clarke of Chipley 1650-1710, Member of Parliament for Taunton, 1690—
1710, and member of the so-called ‘College* with Locke and John Freke, Clarke had
probably lodged in the rooms in Dorset Court before Locke took them over, For some of the aims and activities of the ‘College’, see Mark Knights, ‘John Locke and Post-
208
dangerous De Morbo Galileo—almost certainly a coded reference to some portion of his Two Treatises of Government—mentions that the ‘chest that is now in Mrs — custody was not opened’.'7 There were two copies of the book (that is to say Two Treatises) by 1683 but one was halved and left with Mrs Smithsby and Clarke had orders to destroy the other copy if necessary. This copy, it seems, was destroyed and in 1686 Locke asked Edward Clarke to have the half which was with Rabsy moved elsewhere. On 25 November 1686, Clarke wrote to Locke:
These and all the rest of your cousins things that were moved to and from St Jones’s are placed under the custody of Mrs R S who gives her hearty' service to you in a house that her sister and she have taken near their fonner lodgings and are like to remain there with her as her own goods, imtil you order me otherwise to dispose of them. They are no manner of inconvenience or trouble other to the lady of the house and I believe will
5g
continue as safe there as anywhere in the town.'
While Locke was in Holland, Rabsy was number 9 in his list of cyphers, together with Edward Clarke at 3 and 13 and Robert Pawling at 8.39
By this time Rabsy had begun a career as what would nowadays probably be called a personal shopper. In March 1688
Revolutionary Politics: Electoral Reform and the Franchise’, Past amt Present 213 (2011): 41-86.
57 The Correspondence of John Locke, ed. E. S. de Beer (S vols., Oxford, 1976-) (henceforth Corr.), ii, 606.
58 Corr., iii, 75. Rabsy’s sister Anne never married William Dickenson because of his premature death and this is probably the reason the two sisters shared a home. Anne was executrix of his will as in 10 November 16S0 there was a petition to the House ol Lords about the will, where Rabsy Smithsby had sworn an affidavit: see HL/PO/JO/10/1/393/284 Smithsby vLC Justice Scroggs. 59 *
59 Cypher for correspondence with Edward Clarke, [Autumn 1683?], in Corr.. ii, 603-4. Robert Pawling, a mercer and gentleman from Oxford, had been responsible for the reception of Buckingham and Monmouth when they visited Oxford in 168(1. In t6S> he had been arrested and sent to Oxford Castle at the time of Monmouth's invasion, to
1604 when duties were imposed on all legal documents he was appointed comptroller of the Stamp Office with a salary which eventually rose to £300,
209
David Thomas joined Locke in Rotterdam and delivered things for his wardrobe purchased by Clarke and Rabsy: ‘a good beaver hat made as high as the fashion will bear...a peruke very deep, the caul of a middle colour between black and flaxen’ and ‘a cloak of the best boiled chainlet’.60 On his return to England, Locke stayed as her lodger for a couple of years, and even after he moved to live at Oates with the Mashams she continued to buy clothes for him—in 1693 for example, gloves, 3 flannel shirts and 2 holland caps, and sometimes for things for Lady Masham on Locke’s behalf—a parasol, a split bonigrace,61 6 pairs of gloves.
Mrs Smithsby also helped Edward Clarke with family shopping as Mary Clarke, who lived mainly in Somerset at Chipley, relied on her, ‘her fancy and choice being so good in all things’.62 * As Mary wrote to Edward, ‘I am extremely obliged to you for the pains and trouble you take in buying those things we want which I know is a work very disagreeable to you but I hope
_ /TO
Mrs Smithsby will give you what assistance she can’. From November 1694 onwards, she not only shopped for the Clarkes but sewed, presumably to augment her income.64 When Jack65 went to school she bought 20 ells66 of linen for two pairs of sheets and thirteen yards of huckaback67 for towels and table napkins and was paid 2/- for making them. In October 1696 Mary
m Locke to Mrs. Mary Clarke and to Edward Clarke, 28 February/9 March 1688, in CorrHi, 388; Locke to Edward Clarke, [9/19 March 1688?], Corr., iii, 407.
61 See OED: Bongrace, n. LA shade worn on the front of women’s bonnets or caps to protect the complexion from the sun; 2. A broad-brimmed hat fitted to shade the face.
62 Mary Clarke to Edward Clarke 21 May 1687, SRO DD\SF/7/l/31
Mary Clarke to Edw'ard Clarke 27 January 1694/5, SRO DD\SF/7/l/63
M Underclothes were often made at home but some were made outside by women, in many cases widows needing charitable employment.
6i John Clarke, 1685 1705, the Clarke's second son
46 See OED. Ell, n. 1. A measure of length. The English ell 45 inches.
47 Sec OED. Huckaback, n, a, A stout linen fabric, with welt threads thrown up alternately to form a rough surface.
210
requested ‘the black petticoat for Betty64 is to have a trimming on. it such as Mrs Smithsby and you shall think fit according to the fashion’. When Anne, the second daughter, went to boarding school in Hackney, she was kitted out by Mrs Smithsby at a cost of £18 5s 6d, and, later, Mrs Smithsby spent £23 8s 1 Id on school necessities for her, plus striped cambric, two quilted caps and a tower of hair, and a calico nightgown.69
Rabsy suffered another family loss in 1690 when her sister Maria died in Old Windsor, leaving 20s to the poor of Windsor and 20s each to her sisters, Ann and Rabsy, and the rest to her brother in law and executor William Smith. '0 Meanwhile she was still trying to get compensation for her father’s arrears. In July 1696 she petitioned the Treasury, ‘praying a grant of the small manors of Barton, Barrow, Goxhill and Hogsthorpe, County Lincoln for 99 yrs at a small rent of 13s1. 4d. in consideration of 12,000/. for 12 years’ arrears due to her said father on an annuity of 1000/. granted by Charles II in 1661 out of the Customs’. 1
Sylvester Brounower wrote to Locke from Whitehall on 24 April 1697, saying Mrs Smithsby ‘would be glad to see you in Town again, as some in our Office do, she has been serv’d [i.e. treated] just as we are, for her Petition and the King’s reference upon it, and Our Establishment with the King’s reference upon it, are both, accidentally on purpose, lost in the Treasury’/" She went on helping Locke until the end of his life, showing her continuing affectionate interest in him in her letters. On 10 July 1703, for instance, she told him:
is Elizabeth Clarke 1682-1712. the Clarke’s eldest daughter.
69 Bridget Clarke, ‘Clothing the Family of an MP in the 1690s: An Analysis of the Day Book of Edward Clarke of Chiplev, Somerset’, Costume 43, (2009): 38-54.
7<1 Will written in 16S7 probate granted 1 Oct 1691
1 ' Calendar of Treasury Books, vol. It <1696-97), 3 July,
72 Sylvester Brounower to Locke, 24 April 1697, in Cwr„ v, 100— 1.
As you desired, I sent you sis pounds of chocolate, which I hope you have received. 1 have made you six paire of new sieves, and put wrest bands and ruffles to the two paire you sent. I have allso bought you some wash Leather gloves, which I hope will Fitt, and you may Like, if you doe not, they may be returned and Changed for others. I have marked the new sieves with stiches of Crimson silke, that your servant may give them to you in paires.
On 22 April 1704 Rabsy wrote again:
yesterday I received from Mr Churchil, the bundle you mention, and will take Care to Observe your directions in what you desier in the Shirts and Caps. The papers 1 will give you account of as of the Former received from you. when 1 tell you tis impossible for me to expresse the satisfaction your favouer allwayes presents me with and the Joy I have in your health, though I cannot retume a suteable acknowledgment yet I can assure you I am Sir your affectt Friend and Faithfull Servant Rabsy Smithsby
And again, on 7 August 1704,
1 then acquainted you there was thirty three yards of the Flanell you sent to me for shirts, and that there remained eight yards with me. As allso that...I received five pounds on a five pound Tickett of 1704. I will take Care to make up your Chocolate as soon as the weather is a little Coole for I observe it grinds best and finest then, and will marke it as you desire.
Locke died on 27 October 1704, but Rabsy soldiered on. After Edward Clarke’s death in 1710 she received ‘five pounds being for one years interest of one hundred pounds due Janry last on ye said Mr Clarke’s personal bill dated 24 January 1686’. In 1714 she became a Queen’s pensioner and was paid £20 per annum; she also received £10 of arrears.73 She had written her will on 10 July 1713 but lived on until 1720.74
A Bank of England will extract tells us that Rabsy Smithsby, late of St James Westminster Spinster Dyed possessed of One
73 See Calendar of Treasury Books, vol, 29, (1714—1715), 12 August 12 and 20 December.
" Probate was granted on 23 November 1720 to her nephew George Barber.
212
Hundred and One Pounds Ten Shillings Lottery Annuity Stock and by her last will and testament dated the 10 day of July 1713 appointed the Lady Elizabeth Frankland, wife of Sr Tho. Frankland to be her sole executrix who has thereby (with consent of her Husband) a right to dispose of the said stock there being no particular mention or bequest thereof in the said will or codicil annext thereto dated 16 Aug 1717,7:5 The principal sum of £400 and the interest thereon she bequeathed ‘to my nephew Capt George Barber’. A legacy of £50 went to Henry Frankland, great grandson of Oliver Cromwell and son of Sir Thomas Frankland, Baronet,76 and Mrs Anabell Russell was given ‘what shall be borrowed for the arrears of the pension given me by Queen Mary’. She left Mrs Mary Russell, daughter of Brigadier Russell, £50 ‘to be paid to her out of the money due to me on bondes from Edward Clarke Esq as soon as sufficient money shall have been received for payment of the same’, and rings of 20s value to Mrs M Russell and Lady Frankland. Lady Frankland also received £50 and the remainder went to George Barber. A Codicil written on 6 August 1717 left £50 to Anne Barber.
Perhaps her life had seemed quiet and uneventful to her neighbours, but, as this biographical note has shown, actually Rabsy had an interesting life, on the periphery of exciting and dangerous events such as the execution of the King, the Restoration, Locke’s exile and the Glorious Revolution and with interesting family connections. There must have been no shortage of subjects for discussion with her eminent lodger and correspondent, one of the foremost intellects of the age.
St Johnls Wood. London
75 Proved in die Prerogative Court of Canterbury Wills 1713 - 1723 PRQB 11 576 in London the 23 day of November ! 720 Registered this 29 day of July 1721.
76 Sir Thomas Frankland (1665-1726) of Thirklcby Halt, Yorkshire. Member ot Parliament. Married Elizabeth Russell, daughter of Sir John Russell and Frances Cromwell, daughter of Oliver Cromwell) in 1683 and they had S children. Henry made a fortune in the East India Company and became governor of Bengal. Frances Cromwell (born 1638) did not die until 27 January 1720, and so was roughly the same age as Rahsy.
Corrections
In the foregoing article, the following corrections are required:
P. 205, after ‘Mrs Rabsey Smithsby5, reference should be made to RBS Archives Edward Backwell ledger EB/1/7 R Smithsby.
P. 206, after ‘Mrs Rabsey Smithsby / Novem 2’ reference should be made to RBS Archives Edward Backwell ledger EB/1-6 R Smithsby P. 206, after ‘James Smithsby...Backwell’, reference should be made to RBS Archives Edward Backwell ledger EB/1/7 J Smithsby.
SOME REFLECTIONS ON CRITICAL-TEXT EDITING: THE CASE OF HOBBES’S LEVIATHAN
Ian Harris
Ms your edition really necessary?’ is one of those questions which are so searching that they are rarely asked in polite intellectual society. It comes from the best of sources,1 and it is important not least because it raises fundamental questions—about why editing of a certain sort is necessary and about the criteria according to which it is carried out. Why, indeed, should anyone undertake critical editing? These questions can be addressed in several ways. This article addresses them by way of considering an edition which, it will be seen, is necessary.2 For Noel Malcolm’s is the first successful attempt to produce a critical-text edition of Leviathan. Here the reader is offered gold rather than base metal, and in considering such work it cannot be out of the way to ask the questions, both particular and general, that arise from reflecting on it. Neither can it be untimely to do so just now, when textual scholars in the West are becoming more conscious of the basic fact that their practices are not the only ones/'
Why is critical editing necessary? The question is not one that modem pundits of textual scholarship ask foursquarely about this sort of historical reconstruction. A few words at the beginning of the manual on a related topic seem to be thought sufficient,'* and
1 The credit for posing it belongs to Martin West, Textual Criticism am# Editorkd Technique (Stuttgart, 1973), 61.
2 Thomas Hobbes, Leviathan, edited by Noel Malcolm. 3 vols., Clarendon Press: Oxford, (Hardback) 2012, (Paperback) 2014. Vol, 1, Introduction, pp.xv isi + 380; vols. 2 & 3, The English & Latin Texts, xii, xiii + 1400 (continuously paginated), isbn. 978- Q-t 9-960262-9 (hardback set), £202.50, isbn.078-0-19-960262-9 (paperback set), £75.
3 Cf. Anthony Grafton and Glenn W. Most, eds., Canonical Texts ami Scholarly Practices (Cambridge, 2016).
4 e.g. 'The business of textual criticism is to produce a text as close as possible to the original*, Paul Maas, Textual Criticism, turns. Barbara Flower (Oxford, 1958), 1.
it is with pleasure that one encounters helpful if rare obiter dicta in more reflective books and articles.' Yet the question is obviously of fundamental importance (possibly that is why it is not directly asked). Its importance relates to whether we can say such work effects a valid addition to knowledge otherwise unobtainable and whether that addition is important. Importance can vary according to the type of text being edited—whether manuscript or print—and according to its subject-matter—the texts of lyric poetry may be susceptible of change in ways different from those of philosophical argument—as well as according to how it is edited. So to identify such importance properly requires one to appraise particular editions as contributions to textual editing. That is true not least because though it is editorial work that occasions (or should occasion) reflection, so that the latter is a secondary activity, yet reflection is required to bring the significance of such work into relief. Thus it is instrumental in developing new thinking because it is a way of raising basic questions and developing answers. Such thinking is important not only for the general field in view but also much more widely. This is so—as we shall point out—because a properly-established text provides the premises necessary for further thinking and because (it scarcely needs saying here) the texts of history of political thought are important not just for its exponents but for other historians, philosophers political theorists, and, indeed, the general reader. So questions about this construction of knowledge and its reliability are fundamental to many concerns.
The task of appraisal, too, is one which in the present instance has not attracted the reviewers and commentators: those who wrote at length, if they said anything at all about editing, gasped in admiration or paraphrased the editor’s own remarks about his work, and moved rapidly to tell their tale about Hobbes.6 The
e.g, James Thorpe, Principles of Textual Criticism (San Marino, CA, 1972), 50, G. Thomas Tanselle, A Rationale of Textual Criticism (Philadelphia, 1989), 21, 35, 74-75, and his ‘Editing without a Copy-Text’, Studies in Bibliography, 47(1994), 1-22, at 5.
4 Adrian Blau, ’Noel Malcolm’s edition of Leviathan: a review of the reviews’,
liiii;:-, wsvvi'.europearihobbes-soeietv.oru/iiewpuhlieations/i'ioel-malctiims-edition-ol-
216
present writer, by contrast, judges that textual editing and interpretation are connected in ways which are sufficiently important to warrant fuller attention to the former. For instance, this example of editing raises questions of basic importance for interpreting Hobbes. There is, for one, the question of which version embodies Hobbes final intentions for Leviathan. Malcolm’s work, too, occasions general reflection about the adequacy of the criteria according to which many texts are critically edited. Precisely because it is an edition that is itself of key interest, it invites reflection on wider issues. The thinking that arises from reflection concerns not only the text in view but also a ‘method’ widely-received amongst Western textual editors.
This article, accordingly, considers what critical-text editing is and gives a preliminary statement about its procedures, on the way to identifying why such activity is necessary and how it adds to knowledge. Next it examines some aspects of how far the procedures of critical-text editing have been applied to political texts generally, and to Hobbes’s in particular. It then applies its findings in order to show what Malcolm’s work adds to our knowledge of Leviathan. This task leads to questions of wider reference—questions about the relation of critical editing to the study of an author’s intellectual development, to questions about the criteria of final intention and about related matters, not least about the application of these criteria to Leviathan and to other works. These questions include whether, where they are applicable, the criteria fit all the facts. Thence we are led to pose, very briefly, some parting questions about the relationship of critical editing to interpretation and to the qualifications of interpreters.
Thus attention to a notable edition turns out to occasion questions which are surprisingly novel and which, as they concern fundamental matters, are important. One would not have
laviathan-a-rcview-<if-the-revi<ws.f provides a brief account of the reviews and commentaries, and Malcolm himself responds to some of the latter, 'On the Clarendon Edition of Hobbes’s Leviathan. A Response’, Journal oj the History of Idem ’6, 2 (2015): 301 14.
217
expected to be addressing the necessity of critical editing and its benefits at this period in the enteiprise. Again, this article turns out to be the first critical study of the edition in view, though the latter appeared in 2012; it could turn out to be, also, the only critical study. Its attention has involved a critical exploration of the textual 'method" associated with McKerrow, Greg and Bowers, which has been and continues to be a central feature of editorial practice and theory, in its own terms. This ‘method’ focuses on the final intention of authors and the evidence for it. A desire to develop rather different procedures, i.e. consideration of this ‘method’ in others’ terms, has been common for some time. Such consideration has arisen from a desire to do away with final intention, perhaps to do away with ‘the author’ at the same time.7 It is rarer to explore final intention in order to identify the range of possibilities (or ambiguities) for editorial practice to be found in its most basic specifications (as distinct from its more elaborate forms). Again, this article locates some notable practical consequences of its findings.
The significance of these findings is manifold. It is not just that this article raises, in proceeding, questions of general interest about the use of holographs in editing printed books and about the relative authority of such books and presentation manuscripts, as well as providing the most searching criticism of Laslett’s edition of Two Treatises yet made and points of interest about the development of the literature on Hobbes. More especially, it addresses basic questions hitherto under-emphasized and it returns answers of general interest. It shows the necessity of critical editing as a way of adding to knowledge, a necessity which, curiously, has not been identified properly. It indicates not least the concurrent need for critical editions as tools for the study
7 cf. Haas Zeller, ‘A New Approach to the Critical Constitution of Literary Texts’, Studies in Bibliography 28 (1975): 231-64, cf. idem, ‘Struktur und Genese in dcr Bditorik; zur german istisclien und anglistischcn Editionsforschung', Li Li: Zeitschrift fiir Literaturwissemchaft und Linguistik 5, 19-20 (1975): 105 26; Jerome J. McGarni, A Critique of Modern Textual Criticism (Chicago, 1983). Peter L. Shiliingsburg, Scholarly Editing in the Computer Age, 3,J edn, (Ann Arbor, 1996) provides a lucid analysis of this and other matters.
218
of intellectual development, a matter which has been curiously overlooked. It yields practical results in relation to editorial technique, in that it suggests that the ‘method’ under consideration is not univocal. That is to say, when this ‘method’ is applied to complex materials, in particular those that involve questions about authorial revision and authorial control, it can suggest a range of potential copy-texts rather than obviously requiring one rather than another. These findings suggest that it lends itself to development beyond the conclusions of its classic proponents, as well as suggesting further development for the edition under consideration. These reflections lead naturally to a fundamental question about Hobbes, a question not asked thus hitherto: whether the English version of Leviathan is the bearer of Hobbes’s final intentions? It suggests that the Latin version deserves consideration as their bearer.8 Lastly, this article suggests that the ‘method’ is not always adequate to the authorial facts. In short, its findings suggest scope for further work on both particular and general fronts.
So much is by way of preface. Critical-text editing is a part of textual scholarship. Such editing differs from a well-known figure in the Revelation according to St. John not least because it does not bear its name on its forehead. Yet, like the person from Babylon, it is unfamiliar to many amongst those who devote their time to the innocent pursuits that compose scholarship. It must be said, also, that many historians, philosophers and political theorists are quite as much strangers to it as to the person just mentioned, which is more problematical for them in respect of it than in respect of her. So it is needful to say something about
8 Edwin Curley, in his edition of Thomas Hobbes, Leviathan with selected variants from the Latin edition of1,668 (Indianapolis, 1994), says no more than 'Isjtudents ot Hobbes ought to be interested in the different ways Hobbes presented his ideas at different times’, lxxiv, Michael 1 lunter, Editing Early Modem Texts. An Introduction to Principles and Practice (Basingstoke, 2007), 63, reports a generally-received uneasiness about the Latin Leviathan that evidently uthibits recognition of its importance, ‘[t]his was that published in 1668, and it is usually presumed that, though revealing of how Hobbes’ thought developed—as also of the version of his ideas that reached an international audience—it is less 'authentic' than the original English edition.’
219
critical-text editing here (those familiar with the subject can move forward to p. 227).
Textual scholarship addresses the problems relating to the composition, text, character and origins of manuscript writings and printed works. Critical-text editing is one of its principal parts. This addresses, in general, the principles relating to the establishment of the best text, the identification of relevant evidence, and the methods of textual emendation, and it addresses, in particular, the specific conditions bearing on the individual work to be edited.
Perhaps the most helpful way of introducing the activity of the critical-text editor is to recall the title of a classic essay, namely The Application of Thought to Textual Criticism’.9 Such thinking responds to a problem. The problem is that it is not always easy to discover what an author wished to put down in a text. To this problem the critical editor applies his or her mind.10 Madan offers a concise statement about this editorial problem: ‘[t]he object...is to restore the actual words written by an... author, by the exercise of a trained intellect on the more or less faulty materials which have survived to the present time.’" The problem can arise in a number of ways, of which some are given here merely as a preliminary indication of scope.
The first way is that the author’s original manuscript or other approved text does not survive: what survives in its stead is a number of manuscript copies which we hypothesize derive from that original or (less frequently in practice) precede it. The
9 A. E. Housman, ‘The Application of Thought to Textual Criticism’, Proceedings of the Classical Association 17 (1921-22): 67-84, most easily accessible in Housman, Selected Prose, ed. John Carter (Cambridge, 1961), 131 50.
J<J He or she also looks at other questions of the same sort: for example, in considering dramatic works, there is a question about authorial work in relation to contributions by (he players. The editorial results can look rather different according to whether decisions are referred to what the dramatist is taken to have written or to what the players seem to have played. Compare, e.g., the editions of Richard HI by J. Dover Wilson (Cambridge, 1954) and John Jowett (Oxford, 2000). 11 *
11 falconer Madan, Books in Manuscript (London, 1893), 59. More than words are
involved, of course.
220
problem is then to reconstruct the author’s text from the evidence afforded by these copies. The latter, in an age before printing, often became very numerous and, thanks to human frailty, were often characterized by complicated errors of transmission—a difficulty compounded because it is not always the more faithful copies that have weathered the hazards of time—and, sometimes, by the possibility of authorial revision. A fair indication of the scale of material for a popular author is that Allen rested his edition of the Iliad on 310 manuscripts, which was consciously a selection,12 whilst the extent of possible difficulties is suggested by the existence of over 200 manuscripts of the plays of Sophocles and the view shared by his modem editors that none of these is satisfactory.13
This—the dubious descent of a text from an archetype which does not survive (or more rarely the dubious ascent from text/s to an archetype)—is the classical problem for the textual editor, both in that it arises in the earliest classics of Western literature, and in that it was (and is) the problem which gave rise to the classic procedures of critical editing. But manuscripts are not the only subject for critical-text editorial technique. The coming of the printed book opened a further field. Early printed books— meaning by that those up to about 1800—were not produced according to the rapid and (we hope) highly accurate methods of contemporary printing. They were put together in ways that made their contents liable to a wide variety of alterations. Some of these were problems introduced by compositors, proof readers and others involved in production: idiosyncrasies, to use no more impolite a term, without authorial sanction. Some of these were modifications introduced by authors—as we surmise—during the process of production, its relatively leisurely character inviting such treatment. Authorial changes facilitated in this way—here
12 T. W. Allen, ed., Hamerl Mas (3 vols„ Oxford. 1931). The 310 (for the record) consisted of 122 papyri and uncial manuscripts, and of 1SS miniscule manuscripts.
13 See e.g. Alexander Turyn, Studies in the Manuscript Tradition of the Tragedies of Sophocles (Urbana, 111., 1952); R. D. Dawe, Studies on the Text of Sophocles (3 «Is.. Leiden, 1973-78); Hugh Lloyd-Jones and N. G, Wilson, Sophodea (Oxford, 2000).
221
we encounter a topic which will recur-—can be veiy important. One writer, indeed, emphasized that the ‘[pjower, which Printing gives us, of continually improving and correcting our Works in successive Editions, appears to me the Chief Advantage of that Art"14 Many effects have been attributed to printing, but a philosopher’s opinion that its ‘Chief Advantage’ lay in ‘improving and correcting’ his works must be one of the most striking judgements about it.
Such interventions are not in a very general way different from those which might affect manuscripts—in both sorts non- authorial interventions and authorial revision are possibilities— but print emphasizes an authorial opportunity which can become an editorial problem. Print puts work into cold storage, and the author may wish to raise the temperature at a later date—new thoughts and new literary inspiration may call for alterations. If so, the critical editor must decide what text to print, exercising judgement about every passage. He or she must also present an apparatus which identifies significant points of textual interest. A central criterion for such work, it has long been understood, is ‘[fidelity to the author’s intentions’ according to the evidence.15 A more specific convention that can govern the main text offered to the reader is that the author’s final thoughts should be the standard by which the editor works.16 Conventions of whatever sort are more properly a beginning than an end to critical editorial activity.
4 David Hume to William Strahan, 25 March 1771, J. Y. T. Greig, ed„ Letters of David Hume (2 vola, Oxford, 1932), ii, 239.
‘Fidelity to the author’s intentions and wishes is indeed the principal merit of an editor; and as no further appeal can now be made to the judgement and taste of the author, the friend to whom he has entrusted the care of his posthumous works has thought proper implicitly to follow the track which he found prescribed lor him’, [Maty Berry, ed], The Works of Horatio Walpole, Earl of Orford (5 vols., London, 1798), i,
Ip-1 vi-
R. B, McKerrow. Prolegomena for the Oxford Shakespeare, a study in editorial method (Oxford, 1939), 6; W. W, Greg, The Editorial Problem in Shakespeare. A Survey of the Foundations of the Text, 3'*1 edn. (Oxford, 1954), iv-vi, ix-xi.
222
Enough has been said to indicate that critical-text editing implies the application of thought to primary materials. Though there is a practice not uncommon in the making of books, namely to find a single text and print it, either without interrogation of it at all or according to the mechanical application of some belief or convention, that is not critical editing in the proper meaning of the term,17 This is not to say that it is unimportant or unnecessary: only that it is something other than critical-text editing.68
A sceptical reader in our age of instant literary gratification may cry out at this point, ‘why not just get on with interpretation?’ The answer was given a long time ago:
17 A study of the ways in which the term ‘critical’ has been misapplied would be very long but not uninteresting. A brief catalogue would include Peter Laslett’s claim that Luigi Pareyson’s translation of John Locke, Two Treatises w'as ‘the first critical edition’ of that work: John Locke, Two Treatises of Government. A Critical Edition with Introduction and Notes (Cambridge, 1960, 2nd edn. 1967), xi; cf. 128, which seems to depend on its having explanatory footnotes, because the translation itself was made from the twelfth edition (1824) of Locke’s Works; see Pareyson, Due Trattati Sul Governo di John Locke, col Patriarca di Robert Filmer (Turin, 1948), 59. Sometimes editors are uncertain in their descriptions of their productions. For example. Edmund Burke, Reflections on the Revolution in France (Stanford, CA, 2001), ed. J. C. D. Clark, is, according to its front cover, a critical edition. The title page does not make this claim. The evidence accords with the silence of the latter. For the text is ‘taken from the first edition’ (113), ‘reprint[s] the text of the first edition’ (blurb). Again, it is not stated how the copy-text was constituted or, if a single exemplar was sent to the printer in lieu of a copy-text, which exemplar was used. At 419-23 ‘Textual variations in subsequent editions’ are printed, hut the edition or editions in which they made their first appearance are not specified, though we are told that they came ‘later’. Compare Richard Tuck’s use of the word ‘critical*, recorded in note 84 below. Contributors to a single enterprise may give different assessments of its character. Messrs. Continuum's T.ytton Strachey, Eminent Victorians. The Definitive Edition (London. 2002), which hears no editor’s name, has an introduction by Paul Levy, who refers to it as ‘this first critical edition’, [xv], xxxiv, but also ‘A Note on the Text’ by Mark Bostridge, who states that '[t]he text of this edition follows that of the original British publication by Chatto & Windus on 9 May 1918’, [xxxviij. 18
18 It may he worth observing that non-critienl editions can have great intellectual value, e.g, hy reason of their explanatory or interpretative material, as René Descartes, Discours de la méthode, ed. Étienne Gilson (Parts, 1925). They also have obvious educational uses, though compare George Berkeley, The Principles of Human Knowledge, ed. T, F„ Jessop (London & Hull, 1937), vi-vii.
What exactly are we to interpret? Where does our text come from?...We must entirely put aside the delusion that there is a certain textus recepì us. as to which everyone is agreed, with the exception of occasiona] variant readings; and also the notion that one text is pretty nearly as good as another, and that all we have to do is master, or think we master, the words before us..,we should always know the exact premises upon which we are proceeding. It may be said, Why not take a good, or even a tolerably good text, and confine yourself to explaining that? The answer is; Such a plan is proper in a quite elementary book; but whenever we begin really to discuss difficulties, we shall find the reading and the interpretation are inextricably connected.
That this answer comes from a book of extracts made in Queen Victoria’s time suggests that our sceptical reader is not in the vanguard of intellectual progress.19 That vanguard still needs to carry' forward its work. Even in our own time it has proved possible for a ‘direct reprint’ of Burke’s printed works to appear with a Clarendon imprint20 The results include the reproduction of strange things. For instance, Burke is made to state that Mbiefore society' in a multitude of men, it is obvious, that sovereignty and subjection are ideas which cannot exist.’21 Direct reprinting here seems to be consistent with neither textual editor nor volume editor nor general editor as much as considering what they attribute to their author or victim. It is plainly needful to apply thought to texts.
Here, then, we come to a place from which enquiry into necessity can begin. The proposition is that to discover the ‘exact
u John Purves ted.), Selections from the Dialogues of Plato, 2nd edn. (Oxford, 1891), 226.
a The Writings and Speeches of Edmund Burke (9 vols, Oxford, 198!■—2015), general editor Paul Langford, textual editor William B. Todd. Only vol.i, eds. T.O. McLaughlin and James T. Boulton (Oxford, 1997), goes so far as to list systematically variants among separate printings published in Burke’s lifetime; otherwise the text- editorial apparatus is usually confined to registering differences between Burke’s Works (Ixsndon, 1792-1827) and copy-text, This rather curious conception of editing is complemented by a number of extraordinary errors, oddities and omissions. Only one example is given hare.
3‘ Burke, Writings and Speeches, viii, 438.
224
premises upon which we are proceeding’ in ‘explaining’ a text that contains difficulties of one sort or another implies critical editing. What does such editing provide? What, we may add, does it make possible for interpreters?
A critical editor’s thought runs in the first instance according to a range of practices and conventions, which, for the sake of lucidity, had best be rehearsed here. The rehearsal will look primarily at printed books, for (besides one important manuscript) these are at the core of the edition before us. The first practice— that is to say, the first in time—is to examine copies that are taken to reflect authorial input or which are under consideration as candidates for that status. These may be numerous, and it is not sufficient to examine only one example of an issue or an early ‘edition’: individual variations amongst copies which are ostensibly identical are not uncommon. Indeed, the definition appropriate to work on manuscripts—that ‘recension is the selection, after the examination of all available materials, of the most trustworthy evidence on which to base a text’—is applicable also to printed books.22 This point, indeed, has long been recognized: it was in respect of printed books that Pollard reflected that ‘examination of all the readings in rival authorities is the necessary preliminary of all good editing’."'' Pollard’s point was seconded, for descriptive bibliographers, by Bowers.2 The editor, whether working on manuscripts or printed books, is identifying witnesses for consideration, and there is no sense in
“ Bruce M. Metzger, The Text of the New Testament. Its Transmission, Corruption and Restoration, 2"J edn. (Oxford, 1968), 156.
“3 A.W. Pollard, Review of J. Dover Wilson, ed. Hamlet (1930k The Library, 4fe ser., 12(1932): 119. 34
34 ‘The concern of the descriptive bibliographer ... is to examine every available copy of an edition of a book in order to describe in bibliographical terms the characteristics of an ideal copy of this edition’, Fredson Bowers, Principles of Bibliographical Description (Princeton, 1949), 6.
ignoring any of them (if as little in following any of them slavishly).25
Concessions to the weaknesses of the editorial flesh, of course, are not unknown. Opinion varies about their proper extent. Purists —such as J. D. Fleeman—held and hold that there should be no concessions, for they take it that every suiviving printed copy should be given full consideration. This judgement can imply a very extensive and protracted task for the editor. So there arises another position. Some suppose that one should collate copies up to the point at which only diminishing returns accrue. Just where that is and what is meant by ‘diminishing’ are always interesting questions. As one cannot discover such limits without going beyond them, practice willy-nilly moves towards the purists’ destination. The trend of considering fully more rather than fewer copies, and all if possible, has been under way for some time. For instance Michael Kieman’s 1985 edition of Bacon’s essays collated twenty-three copies of a 1625 edition, all extant copies of the first two editions (nine and five copies each), and fifteen copies of the 1612 edition, whilst the 2004 edition of the same writer’s Novum Organum by Graham Rees and Maria Wakely, where only a single authorial edition was in view, collated forty- one copies and examined others.26
Though all this makes for a demanding practice, that practice is also a wise one. To take an example twenty years after Hobbes’s death, the first edition of Locke’s Second Vindication of the Reasonableness of Christianity shows in most copies leaf Y4 as a cancel attached to a stub. However, in at least one copy,27 matters are different. This copy (at 343, line 6 etseq.) runs:-
25 Compare Maas, Textual Criticism, 21, ‘the preface should...describe all witnesses’. Such comprehensiveness has at least one other justification. See West, Textual Criticism, 63, on editorial fallibility: ‘no one ever checks anybody else’s collations (or their own for that matter) without finding mistakes in them.’
Michael Kietnan, cd., Francis Bacon, Essayes or Counsels (Oxford, 1985), cf. Kieman, ed„ The Oxford Francis Bacon XV: Essayes or Counsels (Oxford, 2000); Graham Rees and Maria Wakely, eds., The Oxford Francis Bacon XL The Instauratlo magna: Pari It Novum Organum and Associated Texts (Oxford, 2004).
’7 University Library, Cambridge, Pet. D.4,26.
226
All the effect of it will be just the same it has been these Thousand Years and upwards; Schisms, Separations, Contentions, Animosities, Quarrels, Blood and Butchery, and all that Train of Mischiefs, which has so long harassed and defamed Christianity, and are so contrary to the Doctrine, Spirit, and End of the Gospel: And which must still continue, as long as any such Unmasker shall take upon him to be the Dispenser and Dictator to others of Fundamentals; and peremptorily to define, which parts of Divine Revelation are necessary to be believed, and which Christians may with safety dispense with, and not believe.
Whereas in other copies there is this passage;-
And I desire it may be consider’d how much of the Divisions in the Church, and bloody Persecutions amongst Christians, has been owing to Christianity thus set up against Christianity, in multiplied Fundamentals and Articles, made necessary by the Infallibility of opposite Systems. The Unmasker's Zeal wants nothing but Power to make good his to be the only Christianity, for he has found the Apostles Creed to be defective. He is as infallible as the Pope, and another as infallible as he; and where Humane Additions are made to be the Terms of the Gospel, Men seldom want Zeal for what is their own.
The difference between these two passages does more than recommend prudence in the search for evidence. The former passage also appears in the collected works that Locke’s publisher issued a decade after his death,28 so the editor needs to consider which passage embodies Locke’s later thoughts, deciding which is the better of the two texts according to that criterion (or some other).
If the activity of collation—the formal comparison of texts line-by-line—tends to disclose patterns, it also discloses deviations from them. The editor of printed texts or some manuscripts now moves to a second activity, that is to say, through consideration of patterns and deviations to the
28 For all this, sec John Locke, Vimheatbrn of the Reasonableness of Christianity, ed, Victor Nuovo (Oxford. 20121, Ixxiv-lxxxix,
identification of a copy-text,29 A copy-text is the basis of his or her edition, and, as noted already, it is chosen as the most suitable register of authorial intention, often the last register as understood by tire editor. That, however, is not the end of the editorial task. The convention that a copy-text is to be chosen and the judgement that such-and-such a version of the text is the best copy-text are themselves matters to be discussed and justified: for the convention and the judgement are both examples of critical thought, and as such to be examined rationally. Next there are the instances in which the editor judges that deviations from the copy-text are superior to the readings that it contains. Then there is the formal statement of the collation, characteristically in an apparatus either at the foot of the page or at the back of the volmne/s, or divided between the two according to one or more criteria. A critical edition generally involves retaining the fonnal features (such as spelling and punctuation) of a manuscript or printed copy-text.j0 Other editorial contributions, whether interpretative or explanatory, are added more or less extensively in order to make the work intelligible to readers of the twenty- first century.
The list of practices and conventions could be lengthened: enough has been said for the reader who is fresh to critical-text editing to see that it has at its core the application of thought to evidence. It needs to be added that there are elements in critical editing which call particularly upon judgement rather than rule. This does not imply that judgement is an occult quality, incapable
19 Whether the identification of a copy-text is feasible depends upon the state of the evidence. This is commonly better for printed texts and modem manuscripts than for manuscripts from the ancient and medieval periods. An editor of ancient Latin and Greek works may never have occasion to think in terms of copy-text. For a survey of the development of editorial technique in relation to different sorts of text, see G. Thomas Tansdle, ‘Classical, Biblical and Modern Editing’, Studies in Bibliography 36(1983): 21-68. 50
50 Though punctuation can be an editorial addition, as e.g. in works of classical antiquity, and it may be an important contribution to the intelligibility of the text. One thinks of Bywater’s edition of Aristotle’s Nkomachean Ethics (Oxford, 1890) in this connection.
228
of rational statement (though one can think of specimens where no such statement is offered), but rather that matters ranging from the application of rules to the emendation of textual cruces call upon reserves of scholarship and thought in which one editor can differ legitimately from another. For judgement implies that the thinking agent supplies something. For example, the evidence, whether through ambiguity or through paucity or through some other cause, may permit more than one inference. Again, procedures can be developed in more than one way. Such instances characteristically provide the more taxing difficulties of the critical editor’s activity. Such an editor may speak, as Malcolm does, of‘constructing a text’ (vol.l, 317).jt
The result of this construction is an accession of knowledge. That is to say, an exhaustive examination of textual evidence yields a body of information which the editor displays in the apparatus. He or she judges which readings should be placed there and which in the main text. The reader thus obtains easy and rapid access to the evidence, along with the editor’s conclusions, and is therefore enabled to pursue his or her own activities— ranging from considering the editor’s claims to the task of interpreting the content and bearings of the main text. It is not too much to say that a critical edition is in some respects a necessary condition for further work: without it, the reader cannot discover easily whether he or she is proceeding from what is evidenced properly as distinguished from what is not.
The difference between the two can be considerable. Here are just three examples, taken at random, showing how the readings of a nineteenth-century edition of the English version of Leviathan differ from those of the present edition. The reading from the nineteenth century' edition is given on the left, and Malcolm’s on tire right. Thus:-
Despoticall Dominion attained Despoticall Dominion how attained
God hath given evidence God had given Evidence 31
31 Another editor’s phrase (‘if I were to write a Teuhner edition') is most likely a product of using in a foreign language.
220
disproving the use o f universities disapproving the use o f Universities
Such differences in readings, though none are so spectacular as the Lockean example, have a great cumulative effect. If every example in this edition were enumerated, the list would run to thousands.
Any quizzical enquiry about the necessity in a most basic sense for critical-text editing ends here. Such editing provides a relatively secure way of identifying the ‘exact premises’ from which thinking about a text can proceed. It is, indeed, the only way (at least the only one generated so far) to identify ‘the actual words’ and so forth of the author, so that where it is successful a problem not soluble otherwise achieves solution. Thus it provides a basis for further work and, conversely, discloses where there is not a firm basis.
But these findings do not exhaust the question of the importance of such editing. Importance, as noted, can take different forms, so that the question requires exploration through attention to particular texts and examples of editing. Thomas Hobbes, in this edition at least, provides an occasion to enquire in relation to a relentlessly active thinker.
How does Malcolm see his task? Readers need to see editorial procedures and their evidence if they are to judge the validity of the editor’s construction, and therefore to be assured of the reliability (or otherwise) of what they are reading. Malcolm compares a critical-text edition to an archive—‘an archive of textual information arranged on certain organizing principles’ (voLl, 317). This is not entirely just when translated into specifics. The archivist’s analytical categories originated in dealing with medieval records, the authorship of which is often unknown, so that they tend to subordinate individuality to general classes of material. By contrast, a textual apparatus registers the contributions of the author/s and other individuals—not excluding their idiosyncrasies and errors—to the versions of a text before 32 *
32 For an entertaining example of the latter cf. Fredson Bowers, Textual and Literary
Criticism (Cambridge, 1959), 31 33.
230
us. But the comparison does capture the general truth that the apparatus and critical text together present evidence for the reader’s consideration. To vary the metaphor, they provide indispensable light for the serious study of their subject.
Such light, it must be said, has not shone brightly in every edition of Leviathan. Two twentieth-century examples may be mentioned. Michael Oakeshott’s version of 1946 states (discreetly, on the rear of the title page) only this: ‘the errors of the edition of 1651 have been corrected, and the spelling has been modernized. Otherwise no important changes have been made.’33 There is (as we shall see) more than one edition that bears the date 1651; disquiet is compounded as much by the anonymity of the modernizer as by the lack of information about what counts as important; and the reader may reflect on the judgement of Oakeshott’s own editor that ‘he was not a particularly scrupulous scholar.’34 Edwin Curley’s version of 1994 rendered a significant service to readers by making available selected portions of Hobbes’s Latin version in translation as notes and addenda to the English text and by translating Hobbes’s Latin appendix. Yet it causes even greater perplexity. For it does not identify precisely the copy-text of the English version, saying only that it ‘follows’ one of the early editions, albeit augmented by attention to a modem edition. What it owes to each and why is not disclosed. Indeed, it appears that Curley drew upon yet more versions than he specified.3' Such procedures are not transparent, so that the validity of their outcomes remains in doubt. Yet these two editions have circulated very widely, and for that reason have
33 Hobbes, Leviathan, ed, Michael Oakeshott (Oxford, 1946), [iv].
34 Michael Oakeshott, Early Political Writings 1925-1930, ed. Luke O'Sullivan (Exeter, 2010), 35. 35
35 Hobbes, Leviathan, ed. Curley, lxxiii; note the judgements on this version from J_ C. A. Gaskin in his edition of Leviathan (Oxford, 19%), v, and, more especially, from G. A. J. Rogers and Karl Schuhmann, in their Leviathan: A Critical Edition (2 vols.. London, 2003), i, 217-22. The whole of Rogers and Schuhmann’s section 111,9, on which die account given here draws, is highly instructive as well as highly destructive.
been used as the bases of scholarly discussion.36
The need for a critical edition of Leviathan in particular is therefore very obvious.3 It may seem perplexing that one did not appear till the twenty-first century. Text editorial procedures for manuscripts, of course, have a long histoty in the West.38 Yet Sir William Molesworth’s edition of Hobbes’s printed works, which began to appear in 1839, scarcely qualifies as critical. This is not to say that it is without value—in some respects it was a remarkable effort, and it remains the most comprehensive presentation of Hobbes writings to this day. '9 It also evidences a good deal of work on its texts, even if it is the source of the three examples given above and is in all of those cases shown by comparison with the evidence to be obviously misleading. But not all of the requisites of the critical editing of such texts were available or commonly received in Britain during Molesworth’s day.
The main intellectual preconditions of critical editing include a keen interest in textual and artistic or intellectual content, an understanding of the author and his or her milieu, and procedures suitable for translating these into a properly-presented text. The intrinsic merits of Hobbes’s work have always secured an audience, and if the early response in Britain to Leviathan was not always friendly,40 the book won its author recognition as a
36 e.g. Patricia Springborg, ed., The Cambridge Companion to Hobbes Leviathan (Cambridge, 2007), xvii-xviii, nominates Curley’s edition as its standard reference, presumably in order to produce uniformity amongst its various contributions.
' Contrast the quizzical remarks of Juhana Lemetti, reviewing Malcolm’s edition, Hobbes Studies, 28, 2 (2015), 184-89.
"8 Rudolf Pfeiffer, History of Classical Scholarship (2 vols., Oxford, 1968-76).
William Molesworth, ed., The English Works of Thomas Hobbes of Malmesbury (11 vois., London, 1839—45) and Thomae Hobbes malmesburiensis opera phltosophica quae iatine scripsit omnia, (5 vols., London, 1839-45),
411 S. I. Mint/, The Hunting of Leviathan (Cambridge, 1962); Jon Parkin, Taming the Leviathan (Cambridge, 2007), with his ‘Baiting the Bear; The Anglican Attack upon Hobbes in the later 1660s’, History of Political Thought 34 (2013); 421-58, and ‘Hobbes and the Reception of Leviathan', Journal of the History of Ideas 76, 2 (2015); 289-300.
232
kindred figure from the English utilitarians and their associates, of whom Molesworth was one. Perhaps until the eighteen-eighties the lack of a modem history of Gardiner’s calibre was a handicap to or inhibition against close attention to Hobbes’s texts. Certainly a keen interest in intellectual content was joined from that decade by a keen scholarly interest in Hobbes’s life and circumstances. It was then that his present place as an object of study for historians, philosophers and political theorists came to be established as part of the professionalization of universities just then going on, specifically at the intellectual point where interest in Hobbes’s thought for general reasons became allied with historical scholarship.
The first academic study to place Hobbes and the whole spectrum of his thought in terms of his time was by the first Grote Professor at University College London, who was also the first editor of Mind: an apt combination. In 1886 Croom Robertson carried through his claim that ![m]ore than of almost any other philosopher, it can be said of Hobbes that the key to a right understanding of his thought is to be found in his personal circumstances and the events of his time.’4' In 1896 this programme was seconded in broader terms by Tormies, who thought that Hobbes, along with Hume, was one of the most important philosophers for modem thinking. Tonnies declared that ium die Philosophic des Hobbes richtigzu verstehm, mussen wir sie in ihren historischen Beziehimgen and Konstrasten betrachten,’41 42 43 He had already studied Hobbes’s manuscripts, as Robertson had done. These advances were deepened in one
41 S. R. Gardiner, History of Englandfrom the accession of James I to the outbreak of the Civil War (10 vols, London, 1883-84), A History qf the Great Civil War, 1642-9 (rev, edn„ 4 vols., London, 1894), History of the Commonwealth and Protectorate (rev. edn. 4 vols., London, 1903). The first, of these had been published in instalments between 1863 and 1881.
42 G.C, Robertson, Hobbes (Edinburgh, 1886), v-vi, ef, 235-36,
4i Ferdinand Tönnies, Hobbes, Leben und Lehre (Stuttgart, 1896), 75,
233
direction by Brandt’s book of 1928,44 and broadened in many by John Laird’s volume of 1934. Laird, for instance, gave fuller attention than Robertson to the effect exerted by Hobbes’s thought. " A further move of the same type had been made by John Dewey along a narrower front in 1918, when he addressed himself to Hobbes’s specifically political thought ‘in its own historic context’.4i’ A. E. Taylor went a great deal further and faster along the same route in 1938, when he called Leviathan ‘in many ways a popular Streitschriff A1 Readers prone to suppose that Hobbes’s relation to contemporary life and thought was straightforward had not long to wait for correction from S. P. Lamprecht.48 But Taylor’s main destination was a different one: his claims about Hobbes’s moral philosophy stimulated much interest from philosophers and political theorists in Hobbes’s ethics and politics. For instance, Howard Warrender’s work of 1957 showed a similar concentration on Hobbesian content, and developed many interesting distinctions, not all of which, perhaps, receive full textual support, and some of which certainly stimulated responses.4'’ More numinous works from Leo Strauss, Carl Schmitt and Michael Oakeshott had already made it clear
44 Frithiof Brandt, Thomas Hobbes ’ Mechanical Conception of Nature (Copenhagen, 1928).
45 John Laird, Hobbes (London, 1934), esp. pt. iii.
46 John Dewey, ‘The Motivation of Hobbes’ Political Philosophy’, Studies in the History of Ideas 3 (1918): 88—115, at 88, also in Ralph Ross, Herbert W. Schneider, and Theodore Waldmarm, eds., Thomas Hobbes in his time (Minneapolis, 1974), 8-30, at 8, and again in The Works of John Dewey: the middle works 1899-1924, vol.l 1, ed. Jo Ann Boydston (Carbondale, 1982), 18-40, at 18.
47 A. E, Taylor, ‘The Ethical Doctrine of Hobbes', Philosophy 13 (1938): 406-24, largely reprinted in K_ C. Brown, ed., Hobbes Studies (Oxford, 1965), ch.2,
4* S. P. Lamprecht, ‘Hobbes and Hobbism’, American Political Science Review 34,
I (1940): 31-53. Compare more recently William J. Bulman, ‘Hobbes’s Publisher and the Political Business of Enlightenment’, Historical Journal 59, 2 (2016): 339-64.
m Howard Warrender, The Political Philosophy of Hobbes: His Theory of Obligation (Oxford, 1957). Some of the responses to Taylor and Warrender are collected in Brown, ed,, Hobbes Studies.
234
that Hobbes had an importance for the development of political thought and, in some sense, for its future that could not be ignored lightly. Its importance for thinking about the politics of the twentieth century in particular had been recognized strikingly by R. G. Collingwood.51 Maurice Goldsmith asked if attending to what Hobbes ‘intended’ would lead to ‘a clearer understanding’ of his political thought, C. B. Macpherson’s attempt to present Hobbes as a creature, which, if insufficiently swift to be an imperialist running dog, was at least a poodle of the bourgeoisie,52 53 * was perhaps an appropriate preface to the author of Leviathan becoming an industry as well as a person.'" In this industry, literatures about the thinker in his time and about the content of his thought have both multiplied, increasingly aimed at
50 Leo Strauss, The Political Philosophy of Thomas Hobbes, trans, Elsa M. Sinclair (Oxford, 1936); Carl Schmitt, Der Leviathan in der Staatslehre des Thomas Hobbes (Koln, 1938); Oakeshott, ‘Introduction’ to his edition of Leviathan,
51 R. G, Collingwood, The New Leviathan (Oxford, 1942; revised edn. by David Boucher, Oxford, 1992), esp. lix-lxi. Collmgwood’s sense of the importance of Hobbes is especially clear in his draft preface for this book, printed in his Essays in Political Philosophy, ed. David Boucher (Oxford, 1989), 224-28, esp. 228.
52 M.M. Goldsmith, Hobbes’s Science of Politics (New York, 1966), xiii.
52 C.B. Macpherson, The Political Theory of Possessive Individualism. Hobbes to Locke (Oxford, 1962), ch.2.
52 The course of interpretative scholarship does not obviously point to the
conclusion that Quentin Skinner's ‘path-breaking work on Hobbes changed the whole
nature of modem scholarship in this field1 (i, xii). This claim refers to Skinner’s articles
of the nineteen-sixties and early seventies: see Malcolm, ‘On the Clarendon Edition’,
308, cf. 1, 65, note 250. These dwelt upon a limited number of items in Hobbes's
political thought and emphasized their resemblance to positions taken by his
contemporaries, not least some developed during the Engagement controversy by ‘the <le facto theorists’. The ‘nature1 of the scholarship developed from 1886 comprised not least a Hobbes related to his contemporary setting, and It also comprised much besides. Malcolm addresses the Engagement to an effect rather different from Skinner’s, at i,65- 77. In any ease, the year of Skinner’s ‘History and Ideology in the English Revolution’, Historical Journal, 8, 2 (l 965), 151-78» saw a rather more inventive essay from Keith Thomas, ‘The Social Origins of Hobbes’s Political Thought’» in Brown, ed. Hobbes Studies, 185-236. The essays by Dewey, Taylor, Lampreeht, Oakeshott and Thomas, and a number by Skinner, are collected in John Dunn and lan Hams, eds., Hobbes (3 vols,, Cheltenham, 1997).
235
audiences of different sorts, so that their respective concerns are now seldom brought together so closely and persistently as this reader would like.
Yet, amidst all this interpretative work from the eighteen- eighties to the nineteen-sixties, the more important results by way of text-editing were three in number. Two of these were Tonnies’ versions of Elements of Law and Behemoth, both of 1889: works of lasting importance, significantly above the average of their day amongst post-classical political texts. It was just recently that one was superseded,25
Why the relative scarcity of critical editions? One element may have been the absence of a handbook. Madan observed in 1893 that ‘there is no manual of Textual Criticism’,56 and though that soon ceased to be true for English-speaking students of ancient manuscripts,2' it remained true rather longer for modem texts. The political texts of the middle ages began to be treated critically sooner than those of a later date. Marsilius and William of Ockham were leading beneficiaries of such editorial energy.58 Their works were edited from manuscript. Books concerning the editing of printed texts now came to hand. In 1939 McKerrow embodied the reflections of a lifetime’s work into maxims, and in 1942 Greg developed these into rules, albeit acknowledging their provisional character.29 Thereafter, the paucity of critical-edited
J See Hobbes, The Elements of Law (London, 1889), and Hobbes, Behemoth, or The Long Parliament (London, 1889), both ed. Ferdinand TOnnies. The latter edition has been replaced by Paul Seaward, ed. Behemoth or the Long Parliament (Oxford, 2009), but the former remains the standard work.
56 Madan, Books in Manuscript, 177.
e.g, W. M. Lindsay, An Introduction to Latin Textual Emendation (London, 1896). The long articles of Boeckh and Blass, in German, were somewhat earlier than Lindsay’s book.
n C. Kenneth Brampton, The Defensor Minor of Marsilius of Padua (Birmingham, 1922); C.W. Prevíté-Qrton, ed.. The Defensor Pacts of Marsilius of Padua (Cambridge, 1928); l.G. Sikes, et al.. eds., William of Ockham, Opera Politico (4 vols„ Manchester and then Oxford, 1940-97), 59
59 McKerrow, Prolegomena, Greg, Editorial Problem (first edition ¡n 1942).
236
texts for the history of political thought may have been due simply to the fact that students of history and politics were slow to learn the skills of critical editing, whilst students of literature had (and have) plenty of editing to do.
It may also have been due in part to fashion. After all, the critical editing of post-medieval political texts is a relatively new' activity, and one which remains uncommon in relation to the volume of material that would benefit from it. That is to say, it remains relatively uncommon outside of certain areas where political thought overlaps with other intellectual interests: uncommon, perhaps, where the author to be edited is not also a classic of literature (especially French literature) or philosophy (especially American, German and Scottish philosophy). Amongst British scholars, Peter Laslett made a notable mark through the activity. Laslett was not, as he claimed, the first to edit texts that might be used for political science. The versions of Marsilius and Ockham would illustrate the opposite even had the former not been edited in Cambridge, indeed at Lasletf s own college, and had it not appeared when he wns at school/'0 Neither did Laslett bring to light the Christ’s copy of Locke’s Two Treatises, though somehow another impression has got abroad. That he never claimed. Rather he pointed out that the vigilant reader was Eric Stokes,61 to whom, one may add, historians of
60 Compare Previte-Orton, ed., Defensor Pacts with Locke, Two Trealises ed. Lasletl, x.. Even more puzzling is Laslett’s implied claim that Plato and Aristotle had not been edited critically, cf., e.g., James Adam, ed.. The Republic of Plato (2 vols., Cambridge, 1902) and W.L. Newman, ed., The Politics of Aristotle (4 vols., Oxford, 1887-1902). The word ‘perhaps’ is included in Laslctfs assertion.
61 Locke, Two Treatises, ed. Laslett, ix, xiv. The distinctive interest of the Christ’s copy had been identified in print many years prior to Stokes' undergraduate reading of it, and not just by Thomas Hollis* emphasis upon it. See [Francis BlackhumeJ, Memoirs of Thomas Hollis (2 vols., London, 1780), i, 223-24. Jean S. Yolton, John Locke, .4 Descriptive Bibliography (Bristol, 1998), 36, provided the first notice of this i»cs in contemporary scholarship. Priority amongst twentieth-century students of Locke in referring to the Christ’s copy as of especial interest may belong to A, H. Maclean, ‘The Origins of the Political Opinions of John Locke* (unpublished University of Cambridge l’h.D., 1947). Maclean stated (2-3) that it was 'of the greatest interest by reason of the frequent additions and corrections which the author subscribed in his own hand’. Both Blackbume and Maclean are listed in Laslett's bibliography.
237
political thought are indebted for other reasons besides.62 Nor did Laslett, as is supposed sometimes, invent a manner of writing about political thought.63 Again, questions about the precision and completeness of his editorial work arise. Though Laslett collated eight printings of Two Treatises, using Locke’s own copies where he could, he did not specify which copies he used besides Locke’s. Neither did he provide evidence to suggest that he used more than one copy of any printing, except the first,64 so that it is doubtful whether on the whole he collated examples of any given printing against each other.6' Laslett was notable in at least three ways. One was his flair for finding new material—in particular, unearthing a very important manuscript of Filmer’s Patriarcha and recovering a significant proportion of Locke’s library.66
See especially E.T. Slokes, The English Utilitarians and India (Oxford, 1959).
6j See James Alexander, ‘'lire Cambridge School, C.1875-C.1975’, History of Political Thought 37, 2 (2016): 360 -86, for this and much else. History of Political Thought has given detailed attention to Laslett of late: see Petri Koikkalainen, ‘Peter Laslett and the Contested Concept of Political Philosophy’, 20, 2 (2009): 336-59 and Admir Skodo, ‘Idealism, the sociology of knowledge and revisionist history of political thought’, 35, 3 (2014): 538-64. For Laslett in the round, see John Dunn and E. A.Wrigiey, ‘Peter Laslett’, Proceedings of the British Academy 130 (2002): 109-32.
w For which he leamt from others, cf. Peter Laslett, ‘The 1690 Edition of Locke’s Two Treatises of Government’, Transactions of the Cambridge Bibliographical Society l, 4 (1952); 341-47, with Peter Laslett, Fredson Bowers and Johan Gerritsen, ‘Further Observations on Locke’s Two Treatises of Government’, Transactions of the Cambridge Bibliographical Society 2, 1 (1954); 63-87.
65 The information on these points should have appeared in either the ’Editorial Note*, or at the head of the collations, Two Treatises, ed. Laslett, 146-52, 447. For other difficulties in Laslett’s editing, see J. P. Sommerville, ed., Filmer, Patriarcha and Other Writings (Cambridge, 1991), vii, and compare Delphine Soul and, ‘The Christ’s Copy of John Locke's Two Treatises of Government’, Historical Journal 58, 1 (2015): 25 49, at 27-33.
m Petra' Laslett, ed., Patriarcha and Other Political Works of Sir Robert Filmer (Oxford, 1949); John Harrison and Peter Laslett, eds., The Library of John Locke, 2”J edn. (Oxford, 1971). Laslett himself emphasized the recovery of the library, see Peter Laslett, in conversation with John Rogers, ‘The Recovery of Locke’s Library’, The Philosophical Canon in the Jr and Iff1' Centuries, ed. G. A. J, Rogers and Sylvana Tomaselli (Rochester, NY, 1996), 67-82. It is perhaps appropriate for this reason that Antony McKenna’s discovery' of Charles La Motte’s life of Pierre Coste, which was edited for publication by MeJfene Bouchilloux and Maria-Cristlna Pitassi in John Locke,
238
Another was a combination of literary charm, persuasive skill and entrepreneurial energy which enabled him to impress his message on audiences of many sorts. Perhaps this, or some of it, was a legacy from the father whom he thought the greatest preacher of the day amongst the Baptists of England.67 Whatever the origins of these attitudes and talents, they enabled Laslett to enlist the help and co-operation of experts in the areas which attracted him, whether text-editing or bibliography or demography. The third way was that Laslett was ever willing to turn his hand to whatever task his curiosity suggested, and his curiosity was abundant, for it went along with a sympathy for the dead which at once resembled a pastor’s attitude to his living flock and partook of a preacher’s imagination. These three ways converged to produce one result— one result amongst many—namely to project the importance of critical editing, through the medium of Locke, to readers across the world. Though Laslett considered that the 1713 edition of Locke’s Two Treatises was its author’s ‘text for posterity’, he used the Christ’s copy, with its extensive manuscript additions, as his copy-text because it presented Locke’s intentions in a form which he judged unimpeachable.6is This was not quite so critical an attitude as the case warrants, though the outcome is one of a number of reasonable choices. Laslett’s bespoke an historian’s instinct about irreducible fact. Yet it certainly put the significance
Que La Religion Chrétienne est Très-Raisonnâtie (Oxford, 1999), 231-60» lias stimulated reflection on whether Laslett properly understood Coste’s activity in relation to Two Treatises and related matters. See J. R. Milton, ‘Pierre Coste, John Locke, and the Third Earl of Shaftesbury’, in Studies on Locke: Sources, Contemporaries and Legacy, ed. Sarah Hutton and Paul Schuurman (Dordrecht, 2008), 195-223, esp.201-5, 223, and Soulard, ‘The Christ’s Copy’.
67 The present writer is authorised to state this by Dr John Walsh, who had the judgement from Laslett himself. 68
68 Locke. Two Treatises of Government, ed. Laslett, 147 (on the ‘4m printing, 1713, reproducing Locke’s text for posterity’), 149 (for Laslett’s doubts about its relations to the Christ’s copy), 150 (for the ‘unimpeachable authenticity’ of the Christ’s copy amongst reasons for using it the latter as a copy -text). It should be added that Lasiett's ’Editorial Note', 146-52, even when supplemented by ‘The Book’, 3-16, is rather briefer and rather less adequate than the ease warrants.
239
of critical-text editing into a very graphic form. This was a form which rested on tangible evidence that was new to almost all readers and which, depending as it did on a discovery and accompanying a new claim for the date of composition, seized, the imagination. After Laslett, British university presses have printed rather more attempts at the critical editing of political texts.
All the same, sequence is no sure guide to causation. For instance, it was not any Laslettian inspiration that led Warrender to become interested in Hobbes's texts. Rather he was led to search for authentic texts because Molesworth’s weaknesses ‘on occasion obliged [him] to resort to the original editions in order to clarify matters of interpretation in Hobbes’s doctrine’/’9 The Clarendon Edition of the Works of Thomas Hobbes began under Warrenders general editorship. He himself edited De Cive and its English (if probably non-Hobbesian) counterpart Philosophical! Rudiments, and had begun work on Leviathan before his untimely death.'0 The edition as a whole regained visible momentum from 1994, when Malcolm’s elaborate edition of Hobbes’s correspondence appeared. It has done so especially from 2005.71 To edit Leviathan fell to Malcolm, and his labours extended over more than a quarter of a century.72
m Warrender. ed., Thomas Hobbes, De Cive. The Latin Version (Oxford, 1983), [v],
,<J Warrender, ed,, De Cive. The English Version (Oxford, 1983). For the authorship of the translation, see Malcolm, Aspects of Hobbes (Oxford, 2002), ch.8.
" Malcolm, ed,, The Correspondence of Thomas Hobbes (2 vols., Oxford, 1994); Alan Cromaitie and Quentin Skinner (eds.), Writings on Common Law and Hereditary Right (Oxford, 2005); Erie Nelson, Translations of Homer (2 vols,, Oxford, 2008, corrected impression 2009); and Seaward's Behemoth of 2009. See also Malcolm, Reman of State, Propaganda and the Thirty Years ' War. An Unknown Translation by Thomas Hobbes (Oxford, 2007), Malcolm and Mikko Tolonen, ‘The Correspondence of Thomas Hobbes; Some New items’, Historical Journal 51, 2 (2008): 481-95, and Malcolm, ‘An unknown policy proposal by Thomas Hobbes’, Historical Journal 55, 1 (2012), 145-40. 11
11 There seems to be no reason to suppose, pace Soulard, ‘The Christ’s Copy’, 26 note 3, that Laslett ‘inspired’ Malcolm to ‘a new critical edition of Hobbes’s Leviathan analysed in context’,
240
To understand what is involved here requires us to identify not least the scale of the task. Firstly, Leviathan is not a short book: amongst texts from Hobbes’s peers which we can call broadly political it is rivalled in wordage chiefly by Augustine, Grodus and Montesquieu. Secondly, there survives one very important manuscript of the whole of the English text, a fair copy written on vellum and therefore presumably intended for presentation, as it appears, to Charles II.73 Thirdly, there are the numerous printed copies of the English text published during or soon after Hobbes’s lifetime, beginning with those of 1651. Then, fourthly, we must add that massive register of Hobbes’s second and subsequent thoughts, his translation of Leviathan into Larin, for this is not only a translation but also a substantial expansion and revision, as well as on occasion a subtraction. These are the basic materials on which the critical editor must exert judgement—and the exercise of judgement is itself an extensive task with any book of such size, let alone one like this, with its lengthy printing histories. Then there are the historical materials bearing upon the text, and the task of elucidating its initiation, development and reception. The editor must write about these too. It can hardly surprise that the introduction of this edition constitutes a separate volume. One can add that reading the proofs cannot have been the work of an afternoon. They have been addressed with exceptional accuracy.
It is doubtful is anyone who had only this task could do all these things rapidly, and Malcolm has had many other tasks on hand. Happily, he has not been without assistance. To a commemoration, at once specific and generous, of research assistance from Nigel Hope, Jan Moore and Stephen Plaister for their fundamental work in collation and translation (vol.1, xii- xiii) this writer adds his mite of publicity. Even with extensive assistance from these three pairs of eyes and hands, the task has clearly been formidable in its bulk and in its demands alike. Neither should it be overlooked that if the range of skills required is formidable, so too are the liabilities. As Malcolm observes the ‘conditions of modern academic life are increasingly inimical to
” British Library, Ms. Bgerton 1910.
241
scholarly labour of this kind, which requires intensive—and, for prolonged periods, apparently unproductive—work on a mass of details’ (vol.l, xiv). Some idea of the ‘mass of details’ can be had by looking just at the most basic features of the editorial task.
What are the fundamental points that an editor must address in this material? The first question for a critical editor of the Leviathan of 1651 concerns the texts which claim to have been ‘Printed for Andrew Crooke at the Green Dragon in St. Paul’s Church-yard’ during that year. To the incurious eye these look the same. The closer inspection by Macdonald and Hargreaves— whose bibliographical work remains a tool necessary for all editors of Hobbes—distinguished three editions, which they called ‘Head’, ‘Bear’, and ‘Ornaments’ from the devices on their respective title pages. They also distinguished their order of publication from an examination of their errata, placing ‘Head’ first, ‘Bear’ second and ‘Ornaments’ third. Macdonald and Hargreaves identified ‘Head’ as the genuinely 1651 London edition, ‘Bear’ as a Dutch, perhaps Amsterdam version probably not long after 1651, and ‘Ornaments’ as later than both ‘Head’ and ‘Bear’.71* Malcolm adopts the general outline of this analysis, and, more interestingly, ingeniously infers, not particular dates (which the evidence he presents would scarcely permit) but fairly precise timeframes. As to ‘Bear’—to which he attributes a more complicated and much more interesting printing history than did Macdonald and Hargreaves—he infers from a number of dated ownership inscriptions and from the recorded cost of copies of ‘Head’ and ‘Bear’ (vol.l, 219-35) that it was completed c. 1675-8 (vol.l, 235-38). He also inferentially dates ‘Ornaments’ to c.3695-1702 (vol.l, 271). These are important and valuable hypotheses. Neither are they all that there is at a fundamental level. Malcolm’s treatment of the Latin Leviathan, a topic on which Macdonald and Hargreaves were concise, though still not
Hugh Macdonald and Mary Hargreaves, Thomas Hobbes. A Bibliography (Oxford, 1952), 27-29,
242
negligible, is full and illuminating (vol.l, 274-94).Besides this, certain features of Leviathan which have a physical presence though they are not strictly matters of textual editing are elucidated: perhaps most notably (vol.l, 124—28) the choice of the word ‘Leviathan’ for the title.76
These large additions to knowledge are complemented by a significantly closer degree of critical attention to textual variations and their importance than Leviathan has received hitherto, a point which applies to the English and the Latin versions alike.
The Latin text has received surprisingly little attention, though in that little there is an important rendering of it. This was François Tricaud’s French translation of 2004, which, along with his 1971 rendering of the English text, Malcolm salutes (vol.l, 307) for their valuable contributions to textual scholarship.
Though the English text has attracted more attention than the Latin, there has not been so much sustained attention by editors to the manuscript and to the variants of ‘Head’, or to what might be gleaned from ‘Bear’ and ‘Ornaments’, as one might have anticipated. The move which has turned out to be basic for twentieth and indeed twenty-first century editors of the English Leviathan was made by A. R. Waller in 1904, for which reason his version makes a third to Tonnies’ editions of Elements and Behemoth. Waller, who was working before Macdonald and Hargreaves had formed their classification, distinguished ‘the original folio issue’ from later copies (though he did not distinguish ‘Bear’ from ‘Ornaments’) and he based his edition on
75 Some of Malcolm’s positions were developed earlier in his Aspects, ch. I!, in ‘The Making of the Bear: Further Thoughts on the Printing of the Second Edition of Leviathan’. Hobbes Studies 20 (2007): 2-39, and in ‘The Making of the Ornaments: Further Thoughts on the Printing of the Third Edition of Leviathan. Hobbes Studies 21 (2008); 3-37, so that they are not completely new; but they do obtain a more definitive form in the present edition.
7<’ Cl'. Malcolm, ‘The Name and Nature of Leviathan: Political Symbolism and Biblical Exegesis', Intellectual History Review 17, 1 (2007); 21-39 and. for another work, ‘The Title of Hobbes's Refutation of Thomas White's De Mumh\ Hobbes Studies 24,2 (2011): 179-SS,
243
'a copy of the first issue’, i,e, ‘Head’.7' The better editors have followed his lead, some contributing further work. For instance, Macpherson examined ten copies of ‘Head’ albeit ‘cursorily’, as he said, and inferred that there were at least four different versions.78 Much more noteworthy as an attempt to address the considerations that interest critical-text editors is Richard Tuck’s version. This, though it does not claim to be critical, embodies important critical features. In particular, it makes detailed use of the presentation manuscript. It also gives prominence to the importance of the large paper copies of ‘Head’, which were made for targeted distribution during the printing process, using one of these for its exemplar for the printer. These choices, especially the first, marked an important change.'9
The present edition embodies systematic attention not only to Hobbes’s presentation manuscript and to the usual printed editions of the English Leviathan, but also to the large paper versions and to in-press variants (which are listed at vol.3, 1293- 97). Five copies of ‘Head’ have been collated for the English text, and a further ten consulted, whilst three copies of ‘Bear’ have been consulted. For the Latin Leviathan, six copies of the 1668 edition have been collated, and a further five copies consulted, besides consultation of further copies of the 1670 edition and its 1676 and 1678 issues (vol.3, 1293, vol.l, 327; vol.3, 1305, vol.l, 330-1 ),m though it need scarcely be added that detailed attention has been paid to other material and that readings from other sources appear in texts and apparatus alike, along with textual
" Hobbes, Leviathan, ed. A.R. Waller (Cambridge, 1904), v-vi.
'* Hobbes, Leviathan, ed. C.B.Macpherson (Harmondsworlh, 1968), 68-69.
'9 Hobbes, Leviathan, ed. Richard Tuck (Cambridge, 1991), xxvii-xxxvii.
80 This information, one need scarcely add, is distributed to several places, which makes unnecessary work for the reader. One can see no reason why it should not be united in one place, e.g. the bibliographical description at vol.l, 326-31, and, where necessary, partially repeated in others (compare vol. 1,318-20 with voi.2, xi-xii). Again, it would be helpful to know more about what is comprised in consulting or examining a copy, as distinguished from collating it. For a consciously informal and incomplete estimate of the proportion of‘Heads’ to ‘Beats’ in circulation, sec vol. 1,238,
244
emendations (see the remarks in vol. 1, 308 21; and compare 200-20 on the value of the manuscript). Though the collations of copies of ‘ Head’ against each other and copies of the 1668 Latin version against one another do not by any means exhaust the available copies, that is not for the present the important point about them. The point is that Malcolm’s edition makes a very considerable advance over previous versions for what is, after all, a rather long work. (To which one can add that after twenty-five years on the job an editor may reasonably call time)/'1
The inductive basis of this edition is not only the most extensive hitherto but is also the deepest. For two extensive chapters of textual introduction (vol.l, 197-302) set out and describe the history of the manuscript and early editions as preconditions of selecting a copy-text. The result is that the exemplar sent to the printer for the English is a large paper copy of ‘Head’, and for the Latin a copy of the 1668 printing in Hobbes’s Opera philosophica (vol.l, 309),82 Thus the basis for the text printed here is the result of a much more sustained and systematic work than any printed hitherto, or likely to be printed for a considerable time.83 The significance of this point is not
81 As Martin West once suggested to the present writer, ‘let us leave work for future scholars’.
8" Malcolm refers to the (copies of) exemplars sent to the printer with editorial changes indicated on them as copy-texts (i. 309, iii, 1293, 1304). It is perfectly reasonable to refer to the physical item sent to the printer as a copy-text, for it is die copy from which the printer copies. On the other hand, with critical-text editing, where the copy-text is modified by the effects of collation, judgement, etc., this usage is less perspicuous (though more elegant) than ‘exemplar sent to the printer’.
83 An informed reader will have noticed by now the absence of Rogers and Schuhmann’s edition of Leviathan from the discussion. This was die first attempt at a critical edition of Leviathan, and for that reason would deserve note even if it did not contain much valuable work and interesting information. Yet its text is flawed by the strange decision to use modern versions as substitutes for original copies of ‘Head', which is criticized effectively by Malcolm, i, 305. ef.'The Making of the Bear’ and ‘The Making of the Ornaments’, esp. s.l. Tins side of die edition was the work of Sehuhmann, to whom students of Hobbes owe much, and who at the time that this edition was underway was suffering from a mortal illness which made his task very difficult. It seems best to touch lightly on this aspect of his work, and to reflect that in less adverse conditions its defects might well have been absent. One might reflect, too.
245
diminished by comparing this state of the art with that for De lure Belli ac Pads.'4 This edition of Leviathan is really the first since Hobbes’s time to compass current standards for critical editing.
The results of this effort are evident in the apparatus of textual variants given at the foot of each text page. The English Leviathan yields, usually, three to five variants per page. These are recruited principally from the manuscript, and to a lesser but significant extent from ‘Bear’. When there are more variants, it may be because die subject was especially fine-textured, as voi.2, p.326, on liberty and necessity. The Latin variants, which are entered for the versions of 1668 and 1670, seem to be fewer in number on the whole than the English variants, but can be pretty extensive when Hobbes had something to add (e.g. vol.2, p.283). It is not just that cumulatively the apparatus comprises thousands of items. It is rather, qualitatively, that it provides at once the means to identify what Hobbes (or others) wrote at various times, and therefore also the indispensable means to commence considering reasons for the changes.
It thus identifies a necessity of critical editing for further historical interpretation. Such interpretation needs the critical editor’s work if it is to proceed satisfactorily. This point is not one that has received the degree of attention it deserves. Such
that such conditions might have silenced a less single-minded scholar. Compare Malcolm’s acknowledgement of his other writings, vol.l, xiii.
u That work still lacks a critical edition, pace Richard Tuck, The Sleeping Sovereign. The Invention of Modern Democracy’ (Cambridge, 2016), 7), note ¡2. The lengthy title of Hugo Grotius De iure belli ac pads libri Ires in quibus ins naturae et gentium item ittris publici praecipua expUcantu curavit B.J.A. de Kanter-van Heitinga Tromp editionii anni 1939 quae Lugduni Batavorim in aedibus E.J. Brill emissa est exemplar photomechanice iteratum annotationes novas addiderunl R.Feenstra et C.E.Persenaire adluvante E. Arps-de Wilde (Aalen, 1993) is not intended to disguise the fact that the 1939 edition was designedly not a critical one, but rather an uncritical version of the five editions taken to be prepared by Grotius, see xii-xv, 923-26. 'Hie apparatus of the 1939 edition was copied, with some additions, from the 1919 edition by P.C. Molhuysen, who had followed previous editors’ work -not least that of Jean Barbeyrae. The 1993 version, amongst other changes for the better, adds numerous corrections to the citations of Grotius and his editors.
K For instance, the manuals by professed historians say little or nothing about it, as P. D, A. Harvey, Editing Historical Records (London, 2001) and Hunter, Editing. The
246
neglect can arise from adventitious reasons. Locke, for instance, has received less attention in this way than one might anticipate because the best editor of An Essay did not live to execute his plan of outlining the development of Locke’s ideas about the human understanding, and because Laslett, though he devoted much attention to the dating of the original composition of Two Treatises and to the additions in the Christ’s copy, gave comparatively little to the development of Locke’s thought. But the need is present. To give only one example (chosen just because it is familiar to this writer), the change in Locke’s Essay from the first edition’s ‘That GOD has given a Law to Mankind, I think, there is no body so brutish as to deny’ to the second and subsequent editions’ ‘That God has given a Rule whereby Men should govern themselves, I think there is no body so brutish as to deny’ can be understood as marking the author’s sense that he had not made out so satisfactorily as he had wished a position about knowledge of natural law."1’ But examples could be multiplied. For one, a philosopher’s alteration of ‘action’ to ‘agent’ in his manuscript may give pause for thought to subsequent philosophers. Historians of philosophy may smile in reading Mill’s Hamilton to discover that the author’s comments in his preface to the third and fourth editions ‘give no clear guidance to his rewriting and imply that much less took place than is actually the case’ in response to his critics, ‘responses... of a kind rare even in the Logic and the Principles'1 .ss Again, for
former says nothing, and the latter, the central interest of which is the physical presentation of texts (see, e.g, its appendix, 127 31 on modernized and on-modernized ways of printing Leviathan), dwells chiefly on complexity and complication when it considers Leviathan, 63-64,
86 John Locke, X// Essay concerning Human Understanding, ed. Peter H. Nidditch (Oxford, 1975, corrected reprint 1979), lT.xxviii.8, 352 (emphasis on ‘Mankind’ and ‘Men’ added here); lan Harris, The Mind of John Locke (Cambridge, 1994), 279.
47 See Thomas Reid, Essays on the Active Powers of Man, eds. Knud Haakonssen and James A. I larris (Edinburgh, 2010), 216, note 21, 84
84 Jolut M Robson, 'Textual Introduction’ in J. S, Mill, An Examination of Sir William Hamilton's Philosophy, Robson el at, eds.. Collected Works of John Stuart Mitt (33 vols, Toronto, 1963-95), ix, [pp.J Ixxx-lxxxi.
historians and. philosophers alike, the ease with which the reader can study multiple revisions in Theory of Moral Sentiments through a critical edition contrasts with the harder work required in dealing with the A and B versions of Critique of Pure Reasonf9
Herein lies a necessity for critical-editing in a sense appropriate to Hobbes, Locke and other highly active thinkers. It registers tire development of thought, spontaneous or otherwise, and so makes study of that development, whether for historical or philosophical purposes, feasible and even pleasant. This character is not identical to the one suggested by Malcolm’s comparison between a critical text and an archive in an important way. Both, it is true, present evidence; but with a difference. An archive is a repository, whilst the apparatus of variants or the separate printing of very' extensive changes is an identification of facts selected for their evident importance. Such an identification not only facilitates study but also prompts questions. The spectacular example given above from Nuovo’s edition of Locke’s Second Vindication puts that point in dramatic form: why such a change? What was going on in Locke’s mind? The answer sees textual scholarship yield questions for historical interpretation. Critical editing not only provides this prompt but also identifies the place from which interpretation can begin with some security—or, alternatively, the knowledge that security is not available presently.
These points, as they are fundamental, may seem obvious once stated. Yet they have not been brought into the relief they deserve. The preoccupations of editorial theorists lie with editing rather than the development of thought. Most examples of critical editing belong to literature, whether ancient, medieval or modem. By no means all the denizens of history departments are as much at ease with the content of abstract thought as with a world
49 Compare Adam Smith, The Theory of Moral Sentiments, eds. D. D. Raphael and AX. Macfie (Oxford, 1976), e.g, 128-30, with the remarks of Paul Guyer and Allen W. Wood in their translation of Immanuel Kant, Critique of Pure Reason (Cambridge, 1998), 74-75.
248
conceived in other terms, even in isolation from such thought." Even some of those who concern themselves with such thought may wish to assimilate it to other things. That propensity, interestingly, has not recommended itself to Hobbes’s editor, who points out that examining the ‘political and biographical context’ of the book ‘may help to elucidate the timing of its composition, and. ..some of its particular features’, yet that would be ‘very far from exhausting the meaning of his work, or from explaining why Hobbes believed that what he wrote was true,n' Js Though some historians may not be attuned to abstract thought, others may be so much at ease with it that they take change in it for granted. Students of philosophy, theology and their histories—who provided the examples of critical editing just mentioned—may treat change in mind as a very common feature of intellectual life rather than as something that requires editorial emphasis. At any rate, the need for critical editing of texts to disclose intellectual change Is inescapable.
All of this raises the question of copy-text and of Final intention. A copy-text displays one version of an author’s thoughts, and treats other versions in relation to it. This implies an assessment of which version is be taken as embodying what the author thought best. Where the thinking concerns works of philosophy and abstract thought more widely, it is more or less natural to suppose that the author’s latest thoughts were those he thought best. The supposition is no doubt enforced at a deep level by the fact that those who specialize in editing such texts often began their philosophical reading with an author whose thought was ‘work in progress’ to the very end of his life, namely Plato. Whatever its origins, this supposition harmonizes with the view that critical-text editing should interest itself in final intentions. Thus the choice of copy-text for such works may be at once an implied statement about critical editing and one about the
90 Hunter, Editing, which is written for this audience, devotes no section to discussing the development of such thought. Compare note 8 above tor an impression Hunter records. 91
91 i, 82, and ef. 19-20, 195.
2 4 9
author’s view of his or her own work. Considerations other than final intention may determine the choice of copy-text, of course, but supposing that it does determine it, where would that choice take us with Leviathan?
This edition displays skill of a high order. Though editors of printed works have commonly much less to do by way of emendation than those of manuscripts, the editor shows not only skill, but relish. There is an interesting example at vol.3, 1090. There Malcolm shows a closer attention to sense than Hobbes’s own. Again, at vol.3, 787 there is a good emendation of the Latin version, accompanied by a lively sense (note n) that there are other possibilities. One feels that the editor might enjoy a larger and more demanding field for textual emendation. His policy about the scope of annotation is fairly austere (vol.l, 324), though sensible in relation to the size of Hobbes’s book and the scale of the task an editor would have wished upon himself otherwise on this occasion. Such abstinence—and one feels that the editor enjoys his work—is consistent with a fuller commentary at a later date.’'2 There is much of value in the notes: for instance, vol.2, 155 has a very good observation (note g) on Hobbes’s ambiguity in Latin. Throughout felicitous qualities of observation and thought are apparent, and that their results are at a uniformly high standard may make them less noticeable than they deserve. It is especially pleasant to record a case where the editor observes that the meaning of a sentence changes according to the positioning of a comma (vol.l, 314-15, and vol.2, 358, 360).
The results, in short, represent a very major advance not only in our information but also in what can be termed properly our knowledge of the text. Here we see the results of a rare combination of hard work and detailed thinking about its results. The resulting reflection on the basic features of this edition and related matters is mostly practical, as is entirely reasonable in addressing an individual work. Though there are eight pages on the specific characteristics of this edition, there is only one on its 92
92 Conversely, there are ample precedents for commentaries printed without texts, e.g, Andrew R, Dyck, A Commentary on Cicero, De Legibus (Ann Arbor, 2004).
250
‘general assumptions’—and most of that is devoted to dealing (very neatly) with criticisms of these (vol.l, 308 316, 317) rather than to the exposition, development and justification of these ‘assumptions’. At this point a little more explicitness might have been useful, for it would have brought into the light the related task of justifying the choice of copy-text. Tuck’s work and the elaborate account given in the textual introduction here are such that it would be perfectly reasonable to choose ‘Head’ as copy- text for the English Leviathan, but one has missed explicit reasoning to justify this choice. The choice is not self-evident in principle, and exploration of principle suggests that more than one candidate merits consideration in practice. So we should turn to questions about criteria and their application, and in due course we shall turn to questions about the Latin Leviathan.
What are the criteria? Malcolm states that he follows ‘the basic principles’ of the ‘Greg-Bowers method of textual criticism’ (vol.l, 317). This method treats final intention as a criterion for copy-text, but there is more to it than that. We need to attend to what is implied in those ‘principles’ according to those who framed them, and to attend also to an important distinction generated by one of them. Attention to ‘more’ indicates variations in editorial perspective about just where final intention is to be located and variations relating to the distinction, These differences and variations have potential effects upon the choice of copy-text to be made, and so require attention here.
Where or with whom to seek our ‘more’? Walter Greg and Ronald McKerrow developed hypotheses in die course of their editorial work, and reflected on these as they proceeded. Fredson Bowers placed a forcefully re-iterated emphasis on the conclusions McKerrow and Greg had reached when they laid down their pens, and spent much more time in elaborating the detailed working-out of these positions, especially one of Greg’s, than in developing fresh hypotheses. It is helpful to begin with McKerrow, who seems to have invented the term ‘copy-text’.'5’
43 ‘The,,.copy-text, by which...I mean the text used in each particular case as the basis of mine’, R, B. McKerrow, The Worts of Thomas Naslte (5 vols. London, 1904- 10), i.fp.jxi.
He considered that a copy-text for a critical-text edition of a printed work should correspond to the fair copy of the author’s manuscript as closely as possible—that manuscript being considered as the embodiment of the author’s final intentions. This ideal standard of the author’s manuscript was adopted by Greg.0'1 The obvious consequence of this view is that if this manuscript does not survive (and it does all too rarely), and no manuscript approaching to it survives either, then the editor’s best evidence is the earliest printed edition, so that that this should be his or her copy-text.
McKerrow devised and Greg formalized this way of proceeding with respect to Shakespeare. Shakespeare, though many of his plays appeared in print during his lifetime, is an author whose works have a very complex history. Part of it took place when he, being dead, was unable to exert any control over the transition from (now lost) manuscripts to the printed versions of his works, works which the players, the earliest editors and indeed other dramatists were only too ready to alter. This is a situation in which the longer a sequence of printed editions becomes, the further the reader may be driven from what the author wrote, or may have written, and the closer to a text characterised by features in which others have worked their will. But Will’s situation is not the only one.*55
Other authors have been better placed to control their printed versions, and also to revise or rewrite these more or less heavily. Greg, on reflection, recognized in a famous essay that evidence of authorial revision after a first printing would justify editorial choice of a later rather than a first printed version as copy-text, provided that ‘if the reprint be selected, then the original reading must be restored when that of the reprint is due to unauthorized
')A McKerrow, Prolegomena, 6; Greg, Editorial Problem, ix-xi.
w For a summary account about the stale of Shakespeare's text, sec Stanley Wells and Gary Taylor with John Jowett and William Montgomery, William Shakespeare. A Textual Companion (Oxford, 1987), 53-55,
252
variation’.96 But though he thus went some way towards recognizing that authors may develop the content of their work rather markedly through a sequence of editions and may see these through the press, he did not consider the whether such cases could be ‘normal’, despite noting one important example.9' Neither did he reflect then that if it was ‘normal’ or common or just important such a practice would imply a need for development in thinking about critical editing. Such authorial revision may imply that a later edition, for example, the last edition of the author’s lifetime, or even a posthumous one that can be judged on good grounds to be connected with the author, is the best evidence about final intention. The choice of copy-text could reflect that state of affairs.
Similar points about a criterion and its relationship to facts that were not fully considered in its formulation apply to a notable distinction Greg made in the same essay. He distinguished ‘substantives’ from ‘accidentals’. The former term denoted textual readings that ‘affect the author’s meaning or the essence of his expression’, whilst the latter denoted those which affect ‘mainly its formal presentation, which may be regarded as the accidents...of the text,’ The implied ontology is one appropriate for early modem texts in that Aristotle and Locke alike would have recognized it. But why would it matter? Greg supposed that scribes and compositors could be ‘assumed’ to aim at reproducing the former, but would ‘normally’ follow their own habits or inclinations in dealing with the matter. So, for instance, if we are dealing with a printed book, it would be likely that ‘accidentals’ would be features which did (or do) not belong to the author’s fair copy, but rather to the first printed edition. The scribe producing a non-authorial manuscript or the compositors working in a printing house, rather than the author, would have controlled
96 Greg, ‘The Rat ionale of Copy-Text’, Studies in Bibliography 3 (1950-51): 19-36, and reprinted in his Collected Papers, ed. J. C. Maxwell (Oxford, 1966), 374-91, at 378, 390; ef. MeKerrow, Prolegomena, 17. 97
97 Greg, ■Rationale’, 389-90.
253
capitalization, punctuation, spelling and so forth and worked their will upon them.
Bowers laid a very heavy accent on ‘the genius’ of Greg in making this ‘definitive statement’, and averred that ‘Sir Walter
■T”" tjo
Greg is as sound as a...Swiss franc’.' A currency may be very sound, yet its exchange value varies. To the extent that the author is known or surmised to control such features as punctuation, etc., they are eligible for consideration as evidence of his or her meaning—which is what Greg meant by ‘substantives’.99 Even Bowers recognized that where the author engaged in ‘sweeping rewriting’ and ‘marked up a printed’ copy ‘so thoroughly’ that authorial and compositorial work cannot be distinguished clearly, there ‘an editor has no choice but to accept the accidentals of the minute revision as more authoritative on the whole than those of the first edition’. These he termed ‘special circumstances’, just as Greg described authorial revision of printed texts as ‘rare’100 One is at liberty to ask how ‘special’ or ‘rare’ such instances are. Greg himself stated in another place that ‘[i]t is not altogether unusual for an author to revise his work’.101 In due course Bowers discovered that he had a ‘serious quarrel’ with Greg’s hypothesis of ‘the lesser authority of a revised version in cases of doubt’ concerning ‘accidentals,’ and he added for good measure that, as post-Renaissance compositors might be thought relatively reliable, ‘indifferent’ substantive variants in certain revised editions were more likely to be authorial than compositorial.102 If so, then editors of such later works may find that ‘the accidentals are an inseparable whole with the substantives in transmitting the
n Fredson Bowers, Essays in Bibliography, Text and Editing (Charlottesville, VA, 1975), 452, 492 note 8,486.
99 Greg, ‘Rationale’, 376.
lw Bowers, Essays, 486,459; Greg, ‘Rationale’, 378. ifll Greg, Editorial Problem, xix.
102 Bowers, ‘Greg’s “Rationale of Copy-Text” Revisited’, Studies in Bibliography 31 (1978): 90-161, at 123, 160.
254
author’s total meaning’, and indeed editors can exercise judgement in about ‘other areas on the same basis that Greg urges for the substantives’.101 Thus, though the distinction between ‘substantives’ and ‘accidentals’ remains of considerable interest, even its devoted advocate recognized on reflection that in some instances authors control features which otherwise could be ‘accidentals’. In such cases the distinction between ‘substantives’ and ‘accidentals’ may be more valuable as a source of questions than of ready-made positions. For instance, systematic editorial attention to punctuation, etc., may yield useful indications of authorial intention and authorial control.
The view of copy-text taken by McKerrow and Greg’s rather later recognition that variation from it might make sense, like Greg’s distinction and its subsequent qualification reflected particular experiences. McKerrow and Greg spent most of their working lives as editors on English renaissance drama and as writers on related topics, and to their textual range Bowers added eighteenth and nineteenth-century literature in English. Extensive rewriting and repunctuating, etc. by the author—rather than the complex problems arising from distinguishing the work of author from that of compositors, players et al.—was not a phenomenon which fell under the eyes of McKerrow' and Greg with sufficient frequency to find its way into—here one borrows Greg’s term— the essence of their criteria or ‘method’.103 104 It was Bowsers who extended their ‘method’, developed as it wras with reference to the
103 Bowers, ‘Greg’s "Rationale...” Revisited’, 125, 129.
1<M That authorial rewriting on a significant scale did occur was not unknown to McKerrow and Greg. Percy Simpson, ed., Ben Jonson's Every Man In His Humour (Oxford, 1919), esp. ix-xxv, had identified just such a case whilst they were at work. Compare Greg, ‘Rationale’, 389-90, and see now the remarks of David Bevington in Bcvington, Martin Butler, lan Donaldson et at., eds.. The Cambridge Edition of the Works of Ben Jonson (7 vols., Cambridge, 2012), iv, 620-26. Waiter Scott and Henry James provide obvious examples of authorial revision amongst novelists. It is a little surprising that Bowers did not identify the importance of their activity early in his career as editorial pundit. James and Ben Jonson—appears in Bowers, 'Multiple Authority: New Problems and Concepts of Copy-Text’, library, 5* ser.. 27 (1972): Sill 5, reprinted in his Essays, 447-87.
255
circumstances of renaissance drama, to a much more extended period and a rather more varied range of materials.
It was only quite late in his life, when Bowers turned to editing the works of an academic philosopher and psychologist, that he discovered his ‘quarrel’ with Greg.105 Rewriting of an obviously authorial origin on a large scale, embodied in successive printed editions, is perhaps more common in works of abstract thought than in those of literature. Philosophers, for instance, are not only prone to second thoughts and therefore to extensive rewriting, but also attend keenly to meaning, and therefore to capitalization, punctuation and so forth. One claimed—in a not uncharacteristic tone—that the ‘degree of accuracy’ he had brought to ‘correcting’ his work had made it ‘probably much more labour’d...than any other production in our Language’, even that he had examined it ‘carefully five times over’.106 Philosophical revision—taking philosophical in a broad as well as a narrow sense—can be more intensive than Hume’s care. From Hobbes’s own century not only Locke but also Newton provide marked examples of noteworthy intellectual development after a first edition.107 From the next Smith not only revised his philosophical positions time after time but also attended carefully to his capitalization and punctuation. Besides, he invited corrections from William Strahan, his publisher.108 Where does Hobbes stand in respect of authorial control and authorial revision?
Let us turn to the English Leviathan. Malcolm presents argument and evidence to suggest that the presentation manuscript of the English Leviathan, which is nowadays difficult
,ijS Cf. Frederick H. Burckhardt, Frcdson Bowers and Ignas K. Skrupskelis, eds., The Works of William James (19 vols., Cambridge, MA, 1975- 88).
l0# David Hume to William Strahan, 25 March and 11 March 1771, Greig, ed.. Letters of David Hume, ii, 239,235.
197 Isaac Newton, Principle Mathematka, ed. Alexandre Koyrd and I. Bernard Cohen, with the assistance of Anne Whitman (2 vols., Cambridge, 1972); Locke, An Essay, ed. Nidditeh; Locke, Two Treatises, ed. lasted.
Smith, The Theory of Moral Sentiments, 34-46,
256
reading, is a text prior to the hypothesized manuscript of ‘Head’, which Hobbes presumably sent to the printer. Malcolm suggests also that the presentation manuscript has some corrections not found in ‘Head’, and that Hobbes was in a position to revise proofs of ‘Head’ (vol. 1, 199, 203, 209, 93). Malcolm, again, indicates that ‘Bear’ embodies authorial changes (vol.l, 233, 313, 315-16). He also finds (in an investigation conducted with considerable aplomb, contrasting with the rather briefer treatment in Macdonald and Hargreaves) that it had a rather unsettled printing history, part of which lay in the hands of Dutch-speaking compositors. He does not discuss in his account of this printing history (vol.l, 233-53) whether Hobbes had much or any control during that process, though he states later that ‘we simply do not know whether he was involved in some way in its production’ (vol.l, 313). ‘Ornaments’, as noted already, he places after Hobbes’s lifetime, identifying it as made from a copy of ‘Bear’ (vol.l, 260). It was on Malcolm’s account the first edition postdating Hobbes’s death in 1679. In this edition, then, we have a fairly full account of Hobbes’s activity and its likely limits, one which accrues from an extended survey of the material and thoughtful inferences from it.
Malcolm’s findings provide much matter for reflection on the criteria or ‘method’ and on Greg’s distinction in relation to the choice of copy-text. They also provide a case that bears consideration. Hobbes was able to exert much more control in the printing history of his work than poor Shakespeare, but perhaps not quite as much as Hume. Questions about copy-text and about ‘accidentals’ as distinguished from ‘substantives’ can arise interestingly in a situation like Hobbes’s, and, it turns out, various answers can be returned to them.
Suppose we begin with McKerrow’s criterion for a copy-text, that it is the first printed edition if the authorial manuscript of it or something close to the latter is not available. That criterion suggests that the presentation manuscript—which Malcolm takes to antedate the manuscript sent to the printer of ‘Head’—deserves consideration prima facie as a candidate for copy-text. For McKerrow’s criterion privileges an authorial manuscript because
it provides the editor with access to authorial intention uncontaminated by unauthorised and potentially unwelcome alterations from a scribe or printing-house. The presentation manuscript, though not a holograph, bears marks of Hobbesian control. Its claims could be considered in at least two ways. One would be to ask whether it can be judged sufficiently close to the hypothesized manuscript of ‘Head’ to afford adequate evidence about that manuscript. Malcolm judges that in ‘the great majority of cases...Hobbes's reasons for making his changes to the copy- manuscript sent to the printers seems to have been essentially stylistic’, though the ‘Review and Conclusion’ is in a form slightly earlier than that of ‘Head’. Some passages about the Independents were dropped from the latter. Malcolm acknowledges that these Independent changes may have been made by the printer (vol.l, 204, 207, 203, 64). Malcolm’s information about definitely ‘substantive’ changes appears to be consistent with a judgement in favour of the surviving manuscript as copy-text. Another way to consider the claims of the presentation manuscript would be ask whether the presence in it of authorial corrections later than ‘Head’ does not indicate that this manuscript supersedes the latter as the appropriate copy-text. Malcolm’s view that this manuscript was written and revised at a more leisurely pace than the manuscript sent to the printer (vol.l, 209) could feature in support of that claim. So could the fact that the presentation manuscript is the leading source of the substantive variants Malcolm brings into his text. One might add the historical point that Hobbes judged this manuscript was fit for a king,109
Attention to matters which might count as ‘accidentals’ if the author was indifferent or powerless but could count as ‘substantives’ if the author controlled them suggests something similar. Malcolm accepts the distinction between accidentals and ‘substantives’ as part of the ‘Greg-Bowers method’ (vol.l, 312,
m The question of She relative authority of presentation manuscripts and of subsequent printed versions, which it would not have been out of place to discuss in this edition, is a matter of some interest.
258
317), and recognizes that ‘orthography, capitalization, italicization, punctuation, and paragraphing’ have ‘potential importance for the study of...meaning’ (vol.l, 308). He also suggests that the presentation manuscript is ‘certainly closer than ‘Head’ to Hobbes’s own usage’ for spelling (vol.l, 221). This judgement favours the presentation manuscript’s claims to be treated as copy-text because it suggests that it may yield ‘substantives’ where ‘Head’ provides ‘accidentals’.
Malcolm’s judgement about orthography is given in the course of a brief account (vol.l, 219-22) of Hobbes’s attitudes to it and related matters, an account which is itself part of the editorial treatment of ‘Head’ (vol.l, 209-26). The comparative slightness and subordinate character of this account, which seems to be the only one about such matters given in these volumes, makes one wonder whether fuller attention is not in order. It also raises a general point. Sometimes one feels that editions of printed texts might gain from fuller attention to the resource provided by- holographs. Malcolm judges that a Hobbesian holograph of a treatise survives (vol.l, 201).110 Attention to what he takes to be Hobbes’s own practice when using a pen for intellectual purposes might afford a standard against which to compare the presentation manuscript systematically and to compare both with the printed versions. True, this exercise calls for caution—for instance, it may be that an author would be more casual in a given holograph than s/he would be with a manuscript prepared for the press (though Malcolm, vol.l, 219, thinks that Hobbes allowed the typesetters considerable latitude)—but, conducted carefully, such a study might yield significant dividends. It might provide further guidance about which practices of capitalization, punctuation and so forth reflect authorial meaning. Such guidance would have wider importance. One purpose of Greg’s distinction was to assist in testing the credentials of each change in a potential ‘substantive’ before accepting it as the author’s. Full information
110 Cf, Malcolm, Aspects of Hobbes, 139-44, for manuscripts of Elements of Lmt and a digest of Aristotle's Rhetoric, the former with Hobbesian corrections and a holograph of the epistle dedicatory, the latter with Hobbesian additions and corrections.
about an author's habits with the pen might assist some of this testing.
At any rate, by McKerrow's criterion the presentation manuscript requires consideration for copy-text and, whether one accepts that criterion or not, this manuscript, in company with Hohbesian holographs, provides a resource for consideration by editors judging copy-text.
Suppose, turning away now from the presentation manuscript, we attend only to the printed versions in thinking about copy-text. The McKerrow criterion suggests ‘Head’ should be the basis of copy-text because it is the printed version closest to an hypothesized authorial manuscript. But the relative importance of ‘Bear", including as it does hypothesized authorial changes from one printed version to another, rises according to the modification of McKerrow’s criterion admitted by Greg when he acknowledged the importance of authorial revision after a first printing. That raises the further matter of deliberating on the claims of‘Bear’ to be treated as copy-text.111 In commencing the deliberation, we would note a puzzling omission. Though Malcolm examined three copies of ‘Bear’, he does not claim to have collated them. To collate copies of ‘Bear’ is necessary on his own finding that it embodies authorial revisions. Indeed, to do so would be necessary even if one supposed only that it appeared in Hobbes’s lifetime or soon afterwards in order to assist in assessing whether authorial input was or was not present.112 The unsettled printing history of ‘Bear’ suggests another ground for collating it. Reasons like these are reflected in the fact that collations from all the printings published in the author’s lifetime
“J Any changes Hobbes made for ‘Bear’ are likely to have been conveyed to the printers in one or more manuscripts of some description (e.g. ms. alterations to a copy of ‘Head’ or a set of ms. pages), but the point is not the mode of transmitting authorial changes, but that on the revised Greg criterion ‘Bear’ rises in importance because it embodies the author’s later intentions. Thence follows the question of whether it would be helpful or otherwise to take it as copy-text. 113
113 Thai the 1670, 1676 and 1678 issues of the Latin Leviathan have not been collated apinst each other or the 1668 version, cf. i, 330 31,1s rather less important on Malcolm’s account, esp. i, 293-04.
260
will be found in Laslett’s version of Two Treatises (and beyond Locke’s lifetime, we should add), as also in other critical editions of works in philosophy, political thought and so forth. Once provided with such a collation—which we hope to find registered in a second edition of Malcolm’s work, doubtless drawn from somewhat more than three copies—we would be better able to consider the claims of ‘Bear’ as copy-text. One might add, parenthetically, that though Malcolm’s account indicates that ‘Ornaments’ has no authorial input it would be worth collating copies of it in order to make that judgement more secure. But to return to the question of copy-text.
The criteria or ‘method’ Malcolm adopts can generate more than one reasoned choice about copy-text. This indicates that deliberation about the matter is required on grounds which are not merely formal, but which involve considering the different choices possible within the frame provided by the criteria or ‘method’ and in weighing the evidence. The evidence, it appears, requires fuller collation, and, again, editorial use of it would gain from fuller attention to authorial habits.
These reflections are consistent with much that appears in the editorial material provided here. Whereas Greg’s distinction was framed in order to deal with instances in which a choice of copy- text cannot be guided closely by historical, bibliographical and other evidence—because this does not exist in a useful form— one of the distinguishing merits of this edition is that its textual introduction provides a considerable amount of evidence and inference about which alterations in the text were or were not likely to have originated from Hobbes. Whilst it is true that to bring such knowledge to a point in order to compare it with the criteria and the ways in which these can he understood would be no light task, this is also an instance where much could be learnt from that task.
This situation implies reflection not least about questions of editorial criteria in relation to the task in hand. Does the editor of Leviathan—and of other works—need to go beyond McKerrow and Greg (and Bowers) in some way or ways? A discussion is in order, and in discussion about this work the question of authorial
261
supervision of the press would arise in relation to ‘Bear’ as well as 'Head', in which an editor could make an inference from information obtained by collating ‘Bear’ with ‘Head’ and the presentation manuscript. The discussion would involve not only the relative merits of the presentation manuscript, ‘Head’ and 'Bear' as copy-texts, but also the question of which criteria are best ‘Best’ might be understood both in general and with respect to the characteristics of this individual work. In general, it might be asked whether the criteria or ‘method’ require revision or development or replacement. In particular, a contribution to considering copy-text for Leviathan might be made by comparing what Malcolm has discovered about its printing history with histories of other works by Hobbes himself and by other authors of his day. One could ask, also, which copy-text would best assist the study of Hobbes’s development from the presentation manuscript to ‘Bear’. Such a discussion might well be complex and protracted, but its results might well be illuminating.
All of this said, intellectual interest is no guarantee of significant discovery or definite conclusions. Supposing, for a moment, that such a discussion did not produce these, one might suggest that the evidence about authorial supervision of ‘Head’ and the number of authorial revisions in ‘Bear’ would make it convenient to treat the former as a copy-text. Convenience is a criterion in selecting copy-text. The choice of a copy-text is an important sense always a matter of convenience, but in another it is a choice that can consult the convenience of the reader. For instance, Nidditch, whose edition of Locke’s Essay has been a standard work for over forty years, though he thought that the first edition of it could ‘with some historical advantage’ serve as copy-text, also considered that to treat it as such would make life ‘hard and troublesome’ for readers using the critical apparatus. Readers’ convenience was not his sole criterion, of course. Nidditch reasoned clearly and concisely for an eclectic version which treated the fourth edition as copy-text and modified it with passages from the fifth which he judged were authentically
262
Lockean.1 lj
Nidditch was an independently-minded scholar, not prone to deference, who studied closely various examples of editorial procedure and theories about it critically over an extended period. He proceeded away from ‘the basic principles’ of the ‘method’. Theoretical reflection about editing since his day has admitted change. It is not ‘sixty years since’ Tanselle proposed ‘an overarching framework’ which he intended to subsume rather than to supplement ‘Greg’s rationale’, one which would accommodate not only it but also a genealogical interest in manuscripts and the contribution (if such it is judged to be) of the printing house. The editions issuing from this framework, he thought, would vary according to the evidence for ‘uninfluenced authorial final intention’ and for ‘the joint product of the author and the publisher’s staff. Their editors would select its copy-text according to their judgements of such more or less complex cases.114 This conception, which is at once more flexible and more inclusive than ‘the basic principles’, seems more like a series of recognitions than a framework, and is perhaps none the worse for that.
These recognitions are significant. Tanselle, who reflected thoughtfully on his predecessors, implied that the liberty of judgement appropriate to a learned and skilled editor is rather larger in scope than one might suppose from the ‘basic principles’. The range of that liberty would include not only attention to printing history and so forth but also extensive deliberation about copy-text and related matters on the way to identifying the choices appropriate to the particular work under consideration. Its exercise, in other words, would involve not only attention to matters that Malcolm evidently enjoys but also
" ’ Nidditch, 'Introduction', Locke, An Essay, xxxix, xli-xlii. It is unfortunate diet the paperback version of Nidditch’s edition (Oxford, 1979, and often reprinted) omits this information, ef, its xxv.
114 Tanselle, 'Editing without a Copy-text', 20-21. Compare Richard Bucci, ‘Tanselle’* “Editing without a Copy-text": Genesis, Issues and Prospects’, Studies in Bibliography 56(2003): 1-44,
consideration of the matters rehearsed here. Thus, though this article and Tanselle’s are not identical, they suggest convergent conclusions.
There again is it in the English version that we find Hobbes’s final intentions for Leviathan? For the reader’s delight in finding die Latin and English versions en face arises from much more than pleasure at what is for many readers a splendid novelty."5 Tills presentation is a great help to the study of Hobbes’s thinking and its development. The juxtaposition has many useful effects. The most obvious of these is assistance in interpreting known content. This is sometimes true in respect of what you always supposed (not least from the title page) but are glad to have confirmed so easily, as that Hobbes rendered power by potestas not potentia (e.g. vol.2, 278-79). Sometimes the clarification is more interesting, as when ‘Feare’ became metus rather than pavor or timor let alone terror (e.g. vol.2, 162-63, 464-65). Sometimes there are more intriguing translations, as where Hobbes rendered propagation by constitutio (vol.2, 180-81). Juxtaposition also permits easy comparison between the two versions, and this puts the question of final intention before the reader.
Particular merit belongs in this connexion to the editor’s dogged identification of the many differences between the English and Latin versions. Hobbes’s mind continued to move in many respects. Very extensive changes were made to three chapters, and the appendix was added. Sometimes Hobbes omitted passages (e.g. at vol.2, 208/9), sometimes revised content, sometimes altered the wording on other grounds (see vol.l, 175-95, especially 175, 176, 179, 185, 186, 195, for editorial discussion). That the extent, variety and importance of Hobbes’s changes should be indicated (let alone translated) was a supererogatory undertaking for the editor, but the results are a very' significant addition to our knowledge. They fully justify his care and effort.
“J Few English readers will have obtained Hobbes, Levlatano, ed. Raffaella Santi 3’d edn. (Milan, 2012); on which, see i, 306-7 (commenting on tiie first edition).
264
Information about authorial changes matters not least because these may be important for content. One brief example must suffice here. In chapter 14 (vol.2, 212 13) the English version states that ‘[covenants entree! into by fear, in the condition of meer Nature, are obligatory’, whereas the Latin has a claim which is more precise and (if possible) more striking. Pactum etiamsi Meta extortum sit, in conditione tamen hominum naturali validum est - ‘a covenant has effect albeit in the natural condition of men, even if it be extorted by Fear’.116
If we are to take the author’s final intentions as a standard for choice of copy-text in a critical edition—which is the standard implied by adopting ‘the basic principles’ of the ‘Greg-Bowers method’—we need to ask whether the Latin version should not claim our attention. Plainly, this would not be as a copy-text for the English version. But if we are seeking final intentions for the work, then the Latin rather than the English version has claims in point of a combination of date, authorial situation and content. It postdates 1651 significantly. It comes from an author who had already exceeded by far the normal lifespan for his day, and who knew his health was very imperfect. Hobbes might be supposed reasonably to conclude that the time had come to declare his later thoughts. He devoted much energy and thought to the content of the Latin version, and by contrast seems to have put rather less effort into ‘Bear’—effort which Malcolm judges to be along lines similar to those of the Latin version, though evidently they extended rather less far (e.g. vol.l, 233, 315-16). He also addressed a larger audience (the choice of Latin implies that he looked to the Continent as well as to the English-speaking world) and worked under different conditions. All these considerations suggest that this was the time to declare his views anew, altering, withdrawing or confirming them. Here, then, is a matter that merits attention, and quite a few questions are involved in it. For instance, was Latin the chosen medium because this was the text Hobbes expected to embody both his latest and his most
1,6 Metin' can suggest intimidation, c.g. si meta me coegeris ani d&io induxerh, Gaius, Institutes, 4.117.
265
considered statements? Does it contain his final intentions in specific respects that the English version does not? If so, should it claim our attention, not just besides tire English version but rather as succeeding to it according to the canons employed in textual scholarship? The answers to these questions would seem to be ‘yes'.-1
One could ask a different question about the work: whether Leviathan does not justify a reconsideration about the adequacy of die McKerrow-Greg criteria? That is to say, could one ask whether the modifications in ‘Bear’ show Hobbes proceeding as far as he thought he could go without moving unduly from his text of 1651, whilst the Latin version shows him making an opportunity to develop his thought anew. If so, and supposing that the English and the Latin versions are indeed versions—versions of one work—then there would be two sets of final intentions for the same work, relative to the English and Latin versions respectively. But the McKerrow-Greg criteria or ‘Greg-Bowers method5 assume that there is only one set per work. It is not obvious that the criteria or ‘method’ capture all the facts that require attention here. These are not the only facts that tell in the same way. There are other works, for example, Piers the Plowman, the Prologue to The Legend of Good Women, and The Prelude, which editors regularly present in more than one version. So perhaps some rethinking of the criteria or ‘method’
1 Final intention, as understood by textual scholars, need not accord with a reader’s view of intellectual quality. Readers are at liberty to determine whether the authors last version is his or her best according to their canons of judgement. It is conceivable Shat a ease might be made, pointing perhaps to Hobbes’s deteriorating Latin idiom, to the effect that the Latin Leviathan does not represent the most intellectually adequate version of Hobbes's conclusions about its subject-matter. Such a case and an assessment of it would be complex and perhaps would prove indecisive. Certainly, they would need to take into account the whole development of Hobbes's views. These are sufficient reasons for not opening the matter here. If they were not sufficient, Shillingsburg’s point, Scholarly Editing, 87, that some editors have been known to treat ‘fmai’ as something other than ‘last’ would add sufficient complication to the question to make them so. 1
1 * Interestingly, /. C, Maxwell, whom we encountered as editor of Greg’s Collected Papers, edited also The Prelude. A Parallel Text (Harmondsworth, 1971).
266
is in order.1,1:1
In this edition we have an instance of how important examples of critical editing occasion further reflection both about its text and about the questions it raises. ‘Every book presents its own problems and has to be investigated by methods suited to its particular case’, as McKerrow noted in another connexion,™ and so it gives rise to fresh thought. Fresh thought can concern not least the adequacy of established ‘method’.
One foresees that for many reasons articles and essays, perhaps even books, will flow from Malcolm’s treatment of the English and Latin texts. This edition of the latter, not least, may stimulate interest in Hobbes’s Latinity, something that would have pleased him very much (even though the editor’s criticisms of some of it would have elicited a long and sophistical defence). Malcolm’s translations of the Latin version, where it departs significantly from the English version, and of the appendix Hobbes added to the Latin version, are in these times a necessary' aid to many readers. They are throughout elegant and lucid.521
Being given much stimulates a desire for more. Textual editing is one of the more powerful sources of this craving, amongst readers as well as editors. The latter fleam all kinds of things that they did not know and never wondered about’,1"' and this raises
119 The facts suggest implications for editorial theory that it exponents seem not to have faced. See, e.g. G. Thomas Tanselie, ‘The Editorial Problem of Final Authorial Intention", Studies in Bibliography 29 (1976): 167-211, 195-96; “The most familiar situation in which more than one ‘final’ intention can be said to exist occurs when an author, at a later stage in his career, extensively revises a work completed years before... The two are discrete works."
1 R. B. McKerrow, An Introduction to Bibliography for Literary Students (Oxford. 1927), 5.
IJI This reader, without having checked these translations systematically, notes a point of interesl in passing. Quaeso is translated as 'please’ (hi, 1142 43).. This is not wrong, but fails to render the point that because this verb has for its basic idea to seek, look, try to obtain, it has here the force of please tell me. Compare Horace, Satires, l.x.50-51, age. quaeso Jut nihil in magno doctus reprehendis fhmero? Hobbes’s quaeso reinforces his explica mild. Curley, in his edition of Leviathan, 498, renders the phrase as ‘Explain to me, I beg you".
West, Textual Criticism, 8.
267
an appetite in the former to leant still more. That applies with especial force with this edition, where so much and so varied erudition is set before the reader. A couple of desires may be mentioned here.
Has evidence of further revision after the Latin Leviathan and ‘Bear’ been sought later than ‘Ornaments’? If ‘Bear’ embodies Hobbesian changes and belongs to the date Malcolm assigns to it that there would be little opportunity remaining to Hobbes for such changes. But neither would changes be impossible. Again, there is the question of whether revisions made earlier, but not registered in ‘Bear’, might not find their way into print at a significantly later date. Malcolm remarks on ‘Ornaments’ as an edition which appeared perhaps ‘more than twenty years after Hobbes’s death’ and therefore ‘unlikely to have relevance to the study of his textual intentions’.12’ Yet when we reflect that Palmerston supposed that Hong Kong would never be an important trading port, we are reminded that the apparently unlikely does happen. And in this connexion distance may be no object. Scholars have long been familiar with the point that the best readings are sometimes found only in the most recent manuscripts.124 Something similar can apply to printed works: the argument that the latest authorial revisions in Pamela appeared in 1801, some forty years after Richardson’s death, exemplifies this possibility/2" Again, almost sixty years after Locke’s death, an edition of Two Treatises drew on the Christ’s Copy, following Thomas Hollis’ serendipitous find of the latter. So we might wish to learn more about posthumous editions, not excluding ‘Ornaments’. Would the 1750 edition of Hobbes’s moral and
Malcolm. ‘Making of the Ornaments’,5.
m Giorgio Pasquali, Storia della tradizione e critica del testo, 2"A cdn. (Firenze, 1952), 43-108, argued this point strongly. 2 *
I2i T. C, Duncan Eaves and lien D. Kimpel, ‘Richardson’s Revisions of Pamela’,
Studies in Bibliography 20 (1967): 61-88; Philip Gaskeli, From Writer to Reader
(Oxford, 1978), 63-79.
268
political works yield something or nothing?126
There is another omission here, one closer to the likely needs of most readers, and one within the scope that the editor stipulated for himself elsewhere. A register of persons mentioned in the text, like the one for the correspondents in Malcolm’s edition of Hobbes’s letters, would have been very welcome.1" Again, the decision not to provide cross-references to Hobbes’s other works (vol.l, 322), which Warrender did provide in his editions of De Cive and Philosophicall Rudiments, foregoes an important aid to readers interested in Hobbes’s intellectual development. Such references are helpful even if or indeed precisely because the parallel proves tenuous—as sometimes was the case with Warrender’s candidates. Still, we have his editions to help in comparing one text with another, whilst here the provision of very good indexes—a notable omission from so many versions of Leviathan—is a major boon.1"* They are a considerable gain for serious study of the text. Yet there still remains something more to ask.
We can reasonably hope for a further instalment of writing about Leviathan from Malcolm, that is to say, a further development of the implications of this absorbing example of critical editing. Critical editing requires no justification couched in terms other than its own, where it adds to knowledge, and such additions are of a fundamental sort, and that such work is necessary in more than one sense is evident. Yet, precisely
126 It is mentioned at i, 271; Rogers and Schuhmann in their edition of Leviathan, i. s.III.7, 184-200, give a concise account of it, emphasizing its 'unique’ solutions to textual problems as well as its less desirable features.
127 They are, of course, identified as they appear, but that practice tends to our learning less rather than more about them. For a different view, see Hunter, Edithig, 96, criticizing Malcolm's register in his edition of the correspondence as overly elaborate. Tuck's edition has a concise register, The apparently curious point that the non-bihlieal persons there were identified by its editor and the biblical ones by the present writer reflects not least the fact that the latter, spending quite a lot of time on trains during early mornings one year, wanted some work which required only two compact volumes. 128
128 There is scope for at least one further index to complement this edition, namely an index verborum for the Latin text.
because it is necessary to understanding, it follows that this way of making additions to knowledge is in that respect not an end in itself. The end of attending to textual considerations is to obtain a better understanding of texts. One of the most distinguished of critical editors long ago made an important point about ‘details’. ‘Their dignity comes from their being essential to complete treatment’.1'9 Complete treatment, since critical editing focuses upon authorial meaning, implies a movement from editing to interpreting more broadly, not least because, as we saw earlier, ‘the reading and the interpretation are inextricably connected’. It is natural that Malcolm shows an inclination here to interpret some features of Hobbes’s thought, and the results are extremely interesting, even a cause of pleasure.1’0 It would be good to learn more about how and how far the critically-determined readings given here alter existing interpretations or give grounds for new ones. Again, more broadly, it is a serious question, where the ‘essential’ is concerned, whether a scholar who has studied a text for so long and so closely is not rather better qualified than many others to interpret it One answer is borne out by ample
‘~9 F.J.A. Hort to B. F. Westcott, 9 May 1862, printed in A.F. Hort, The Life and Letters of Fenton John A nthony Hort (2 vols., London 1896), i, 45 5.
lj!' e.g. i, 48, cf. 80, 87. There Malcolm likens Hobbes’s tendency to look upon philosophical error and popular delusion as features of one ‘complex mass of errors and absurdities’ to Cobbed’s view of corruption in nineteenth century Britain as manifestations of ‘The Thing’. Whether there were one or more common features uniting Hobbes’s ‘Thing’ in his mind or elsewhere bears consideration. So does the question of whether a comparison in this respect (as well as others) between Hobbes and the later Collingwood in respect of each one’s ‘Thing’ might not be more illuminating than one between Hobbes and Cobbett. Collingwood drew a line from the philosophers of his youth, who insisted that philosophy could make no difference to practice, through the politicians and press of his middle-age, to irrationalism and Fascism. See his Autobiography (Oxford, 1939), esp. pp.48-9, 146-67. He suggested next that error about the character of metaphysics undermined civilization and science alike, An Essay on Metaphysics (Oxford, 1940), esp. pp.342-3, before going to argue that philosophy rightly understood was necessary to practice, that the proper end of the latter was to minimize force in our dealings with others, and that this account of civilization contrasted with force and irrationality—as he now called it, barbarism. See The Men’ Leviathan, 1.21, 1.63-68, 18.1-19.92, 34,5-34.52, 36.1-36.12, 36.9-36.94, 41.12, 41.16, 41.54, As with Hobbes, so with Collingwood, a comprehensive ‘Tiling' and a comprehensive alternative to it stand in contrast.
270
precedents.131 Here, then, are good reasons to await Malcolm’s biography of Hobbes, as well as a commentary on Leviathan from his pen, with great interest.132
Meanwhile, we can turn back to the present edition* Some first impressions are recorded here. It is right to leave the reader with an enduring one. It is said that Beaverbrook, on being presented with a very large biography of another press baron,!jj remarked ‘this book weighs too much’. The weight of this book, whether physical or intellectual, though not disproportionate to its subject, is considerable, and not everyone will pick it up: but this reader records that he did not put it down for a long time. Here is an item from which all students of Hobbes, amongst others, can learn, and those who are wise will learn for many years. Learning may include learning to ask further questions about critical-text editing.lj4
University> of Leicester
■1 e.g. John Burnet, ed., The Ethics of Aristotle (London, 1900); Cyril Bailey, ect, T. Lucretii Cari, De return, natura (3 vols., Oxford, 1947); and, in our own time, the work of Martin West on Hesiod as editor, commentator and translator, too numerous in its manifestations to list here. One willingly recognizes that there are examples on the other side of the question.
132 See also Malcolm, 'Hobbes on Sexual Desire’, Hobbes Studies 28, 1 (2015): 77- 102; ‘Thomas Hobbes: liberal illiberal', Journal of the British Academy 4 (2016): 113- 36.
133 Reginald Pound and Geoffrey Harmswortb, Northeliffit (London, 1959). This volume is pp.xvi + 933.
134 The author would like to thank Professor Gordon Campbell and Professor Martin Dzelzainis (principally in respect of a topie their advice led him to forego). Professor John Coffey (for the loan of a book), Professor Alan Cromartie (for confirming an impression), the editor (for raising a question about Collingwood), and Dr. Roger Schofield and Dr. John Walsh (for information about Peter Laslett). He is indebted in another way to Mr. Alan McNamara, who recovered the computer files of which a draft of this article was a part.
Invitation to Subscribers
Subscribers are invited to offer one-page announcements of their newly-published books, if related to Locke, for inclusion free of charge. This would ensure wide publicity, as Locke Studies is bought on subscription by the libraries of major British and American universities, and also in France, Germany, Italy, The Netherlands, Denmark, Japan, Australia, Canada and New Zealand, among others.
Submissions should be sent as an e-mail attachment, and prepared in Word, or a compatible format, to fit A4 page size and styled to allow for reduction to 70% (e.g. Times font size 16, 3cm margins). Apart from bibliographical details, information on the contents can be included. Presentation should be as for an advertisement
Non-subscribers should ask their publishers to submit a one-page advert, for which there would be a charge of £50.________________________
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
Locke Studies (2001—)
The price of Locke Studies is £32, or US $64, or €54. The journal may be obtained through agents or directly from the Editor, as a single volume or on regular subscription. Vbi. 1 (2001) and the subsequent volumes are still available (at this price).
Individuals may obtain Locke Studies at a concessionary rate Editor, at the address given inside the front a payment of £16, or US $32, or €27 per
ostage by surface mail (airmail to Europe), delivery is £4 or $8 extra. Cheques should be ncke Studies’.
Locke Newsletter (1970-2000)
64 pp,, including a complete index to the previous thirty years (69 pp.), is available on the same terms as Locke Studies (see above).
Previous issues of The Locke Newsletter can be obtained either through agents or directly from the Editor, at the former price of £17, or $34, or €30, which includes postage. (The concessionary rate for individuals, buying directly from the Editor, is £9.50, or $19, or €17.50.) Nos. 1-30 (1970-99) are all available, though some early issues (usually nos. 1-8 and 16) can only be supplied in the form of xeroxed sheets. The contents of nos. 1-25 can be seen from the triple index in no. 25 (1994), or on the website (www.luc.edu/ph ilosophy/LockeStudies).
L O C K E S T U D I E S v o L . r 6 2 0 1 6
3 The Role of Appropriation in Locke’s Account of Persons
and Personal Identity RUTH BOEKER
41 Locke on Knowledge of Existence NATHAN ROCKWOOD
69 Physica in John Locke’s Classifications of the Branches of Knowledge and Adversaria GIULIANA DI BIASE
167 Peter Anstey on Locke’s Natural Philosophy v JONATHAN CRAIG WALMSLEY
195 The Wider World of Locke’s Landlady, Rabsy Smithsby BRIDGET CLARKE
215 Some Reflections on Critical-Text Editing: The Case of Hobbes’s Leviathan IAN HARRIS